Title: Proximal Empirical Bayes for Sparse Regression with Posterior Decision Support

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.39983v1

Published Time: Thu, 01 Oct 2026 02:02:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
# Proximal Empirical Bayes for Sparse Regression with Posterior Decision Support 

## Dimitrios Roxanas ∗

## School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, The University of Sheffield, S3 7RH, United Kingdom October 1, 2026 

Abstract 

Sparse regression requires both estimation and a decision about which effects to retain. Bayesian shrinkage supplies uncertainty for that decision, but richer prior hierarchies can make calibration and posterior computation demanding. We develop a computationally efficient empirical Bayes framework for Gaussian sparse regression based on convex penalties and log-concave priors. The observation scale and global shrinkage parameter are calibrated separately, the mode summarises information from the joint posterior and provides coefficient estimates, and a proximal sampler supplies posterior uncertainty. A posterior-scale magnitude threshold and activation probability then convert these outputs into a sparse decision. The same proximal structure is reused throughout, making optimisation and sampling inexpensive and allowing extensions to other convex penalties with tractable proximal maps. We also develop empirical Bayes calibration under affine information, distinguishing hard homogeneous constraints from soft nonhomogeneous affine information, and introduce geometry-aware posterior preconditioning when strong affine information creates low-rank stiffness. Synthetic experiments show accurate recovery when the sample size exceeds the number of predictors, conservative weak-signal behaviour when predictors outnumber observations, and substantial gains in Monte Carlo efficiency from geometry-aware scaling. On a diabetes dataset, posterior uncertainty agrees closely with established Bayesian analyses while the terminal decision provides a sparser practical summary. 

Keywords: sparse regression, variable selection, empirical Bayes, proximal MCMC, uncertainty quantification, affine constraints 

> ∗

d.roxanas@sheffield.ac.uk 

1arXiv:2609.39983v1 [stat.ME] 30 Sep 2026 Contents 

1 Introduction 22 Model and methodology 5

2.1 Likelihood scale calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52.2 Moreau–Yosida smoothing and MYULA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62.3 Empirical Bayes calibration and affine information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92.4 MAP estimation and role in selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 2.5 Posterior-informed sparse decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 2.6 Geometry-aware preconditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 

3 Numerical studies 18 

3.1 Study 1: End-to-end sparse regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 3.2 Study 2: Soft affine information and numerical geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 3.3 Study 3: Diabetes data and external benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 

4 Discussion 29 

# 1 Introduction 

Sparse regression has two related goals: estimating a coefficient vector and deciding which co-ordinates are important enough to retain. Penalised estimators such as the Lasso address both through a sparse optimisation problem Tibshirani (1996). Under a Gaussian likelihood, the same ℓ1

penalty corresponds to an independent Laplace prior Park and Casella (2008), which adds posterior information about coefficient magnitude, sign and uncertainty. Bayesian variable selection uses this information in many ways, including spike-and-slab models, continuous shrinkage priors, posterior inclusion summaries and decision rules Bondell and Reich (2012); Hahn and Carvalho (2015). These richer Bayesian formulations can be highly effective, but posterior computation can also become demanding, and conclusions may depend materially on prior specification and hyperparameters. Recent work has connected variable selection with optimisation and developed optimisation-based Bayesian methods for sparse and constrained problems Duan (2026); Xu and Duan (2023); Xu, Zhou, Hu, and Duan (2024); Zhou, Heng, Chi, and Zhou (2024). A related computational framework has been developed for Bayesian inverse problems with convex nonsmooth priors. In that setting, empirical Bayes can calibrate regularisation parameters, proximal optimisation can compute maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimators, and proximal Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) can 2explore the posterior despite the nonsmooth prior potential De Bortoli, Durmus, Pereyra, and Fernandez Vidal (2020); Durmus, Moulines, and Pereyra (2018); Fernandez Vidal, De Bortoli, Pereyra, and Durmus (2020); Pereyra (2016); Pereyra, Mieles, and Zygalakis (2020). This line of work uses the Moreau–Yosida unadjusted Langevin algorithm (MYULA); Moreau–Yosida smoothing is a key device because it replaces the nonsmooth term by a differentiable approximation with a gradient available through the proximal map. The resulting smooth approximation is not tied to MYULA: it can also be explored with other gradient-based samplers, including Hamiltonian Monte Carlo; see, for example, Xu et al. (2024); Zhou et al. (2024). We adapt this computational framework for Gaussian sparse regression. The proposed workflow first estimates the observation variance, ̂ σ2, then calibrates a global Laplace shrinkage parameter, ̂

θ, by stochastic approximation proximal gradient (SAPG), computes the nonsmoothed MAP, ̂

βMAP , by FISTA, and uses MYULA to obtain posterior uncertainty from a Moreau-smoothed approximation. The MAP provides a joint sparse anchor for selection and coefficient estimation, while posterior activation probabilities are then used to decide which MAP-supported coordinates remain relevant under uncertainty. The resulting pipeline here is ̂

σ2 −→ ̂ θ −→ ̂ βMAP and posterior samples −→ selected set ̂ S. 

Under a continuous shrinkage prior, posterior draws are almost surely nonzero, so selection requires a practical notion of effect size. We use a posterior-scale threshold and first require |̂βMAP ,j | ≥ τ, 

then demand sufficiently high posterior probability that |βj | exceeds the same threshold. The first condition keeps the decision tied to a jointly coherent sparse fit; the second checks whether that practical magnitude is supported by the posterior sample. A further contribution of the paper is adapting the SAPG methodology of Fernandez Vidal et al. (2020) to accommodate parameter calibration under affine constraints, which appear, for example, in compositional data analysis. For a hard homogeneous restriction of the form Aβ = 0, the prior is supported on a lower-dimensional linear space and the empirical Bayes score depends on its intrinsic dimension. For a nonhomogeneous affine relation, such as 

> p∑
> j=1

βj = 1, direct restriction changes the prior normalising constant in a less tractable way. We therefore retain the ambient-space homogeneous prior and impose the relation softly through a Gaussian pseudo-observation. This preserves the unconstrained-homogeneous SAPG score, while allowing the affine information to enter through the smooth part of the model. Both cases arise in our concurrent sparse index-3tracking application Roxanas (2025): portfolio construction used a soft sum-to-one condition, whereas rebalancing used hard self-financing changes with sum zero. A practical attraction of working within this convex setting is its computational economy. Laplace and elastic net-type penalties lead to inexpensive proximal updates, fast MAP calculation and sampling algorithms that reuse the same structure. Hierarchical shrinkage models can offer greater prior flexibility, but usually do so at the price of additional calibration and posterior computation. Our goal here is not to advocate for the former family, but rather to address the question of how far a comparatively simple log-concave model can be taken when shrinkage calibration, posterior uncertainty and final selection are handled as separate stages. Three studies examine and showcase the method. Study 1 evaluates the complete unconstrained workflow in both n > p and p > n regimes, where n is the number of observations and p the number of predictors. Study 2 examines soft affine information and the low-rank stiffness that it can introduce into posterior sampling. This can produce slow mixing, which we mitigate through a low-rank geometry-aware preconditioner. Study 3 applies our workflow to the diabetes data used in Efron, Hastie, Johnstone, and Tibshirani (2004), and compares its posterior intervals with externally reported Bayesian analyses. In particular, the reported 95% Bayesian zero-exclusion pattern agrees with the ProxMCMC, Bayesian lasso and horseshoe analyses reported by Zhou et al. (2024), while our additional MAP-plus-posterior rule produces a smaller practical support at its reference operating point. Two additional numerical audits are reported in the supplement: one verifies the intrinsic-dimensional SAPG calibration for a hard homogeneous constraint, and the other examines sensitivity to the observation scale and Moreau parameter. We use the Laplace prior throughout to keep the calibration and the role of the sparse decision transparent, but the proximal optimisation and sampling components extend to other proper closed convex penalties with tractable proximal maps, including elastic net penalties. Section 2.3 notes what changes in the empirical Bayes calibration when the simple homogeneous Laplace score is no longer available. The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 gives the model and computational methodology, Section 3 presents the numerical studies, and Section 4 discusses the main findings and extensions. Further derivations and implementation details are provided in the supplement. 42 Model and methodology 

We work with n observations and p predictors: 

y = Xβ + ε, ε ∼ N (0 , σ 2In), (1) with y ∈ Rn, X ∈ Rn×p and β ∈ Rp. The response and predictors are centred when an intercept is not modelled explicitly, and predictor scaling is stated for each experiment. Conditional on σ2, the likelihood is 

π(y | β) ∝ exp {− f0(β)}, f0(β) = 12σ2 ∥y − Xβ ∥22. (2) We use the Laplace family 

π(β | θ) ∝ exp {− θg (β)}, g(β) = ∥β∥1, θ > 0 (3) as the shrinkage prior. Conditional on ( σ2, θ ), the posterior is 

π(β | y, σ 2, θ ) ∝ π(y | β, σ 2) π(β | θ).

## 2.1 Likelihood scale calibration 

We estimate the observation variance before the empirical Bayes step and treat the result as fixed thereafter. This scale matters because it controls both the likelihood–prior balance and the curvature used in the proximal calculations. When residual degrees of freedom are available, let q = rank( X) < n and let ̂ βLS denote a least-squares solution. The usual Gaussian residual estimator is ̂

σ2res = ∥y − X̂ βLS ∥22

n − q , q = rank( X) < n. (4) If an intercept is fitted, including implicitly through sample centring, the denominator is reduced by one additional degree of freedom. When p ≥ n and X has full row rank, ordinary least squares leaves no residual degrees of freedom. Under a sparse high-dimensional model we use the scaled Lasso of Sun and Zhang (2012) as an auxiliary estimator, (̂βSL ,̂ σSL ) ∈ arg min  

> β∈Rp, σ> 0
> {

∥y − Xβ ∥22

2nσ + σ

2 + λ0∥β∥1

> }

, λ0 =

> √

2 log pn . (5) 5In finite samples, shrinkage can leave signal in the scaled Lasso residuals and inflate the resulting variance. We therefore use the scaled Lasso only to define the provisional support ̂

SSL = {j :̂ βSL ,j ̸ = 0 }, (6) refit least squares on that support, ̂

βpost ,̂ SSL ∈ arg min  

> b∈R|̂SSL |

∥y − X̂ SSL b∥22, (7) and use ̂

σ2postOLS = ∥y − X̂ SSL ̂ βpost ,̂ SSL ∥22

n − rank( X̂ SSL ) . (8) An intercept adjustment is made when needed. Because the support is data-dependent, (8) is used as a plug-in scale rather than as an unbiased post-selection variance estimator. We emphasise that the scaled Lasso and post-OLS coefficients are not used downstream. Thus ̂

σ2 =

> ̂

σ2res , rank( X) < n, ̂

σ2postOLS , rank( X) = n under sparse high-dimensional structure .

(9) Section 3.1 shows the finite-sample effect of this choice in the p > n regime. Other scale estimators could be substituted at this stage, including square-root Lasso, robust residual scales and high-dimensional moment estimators under stronger assumptions. The supplementary sensitivity analysis separately examines how alternative supplied scales propagate through the fitted posterior and terminal selection rule. When the quadratic data-fit term is better viewed as a loss and no physical noise scale is available, the same architecture can instead use a generalised Bayes learning rate or inverse temperature. Our sparse index-tracking application Roxanas (2025) presents such an example. 

## 2.2 Moreau–Yosida smoothing and MYULA 

We write f for the smooth quadratic term in the negative log-posterior: f = f0 in the unconstrained model, and f = fτc when the soft affine term introduced in subsection 2.3 is present. The posterior combines f with a convex but nonsmooth ℓ1 term. Proximal MCMC methods exploit this structure 6through Moreau–Yosida smoothing. For a proper closed convex function g, its Moreau–Yosida envelope is 

gλ(w) = min 

> u∈Rp
> {

g(u) + 12λ∥u − w∥22

> }

, λ > 0, (10) and we write prox λg (w) = arg min 

> u∈Rp
> {

g(u) + 12λ∥u − w∥22

> }

for the corresponding proximal map. The envelope has gradient 

∇gλ(β) = 1

λ

> (

β − prox λg (β)

> )

. (11) For the ℓ1 penalty, the proximal map reduces to coordinatewise soft-thresholding. Moreau smoothing therefore replaces the nonsmooth term by a differentiable approximation with an explicitly available gradient; see, for example, Durmus et al. (2018) and Zhou et al. (2024, Section 2.1). The smoothing parameter λ controls both approximation and computation. As λ ↓ 0, the Moreau envelope converges pointwise to the original convex function and, under the conditions used for MYULA, the induced smoothed posterior converges to the nonsmoothed target in total variation Durmus et al. (2018); Pereyra et al. (2020). Smaller values of λ therefore sharpen the posterior approximation, but also increase the Lipschitz constant of the smoothed gradient and restrict the admissible Langevin timestep. The supplementary sensitivity analysis varies λ on a problem with a synthetic dataset, allowing this approximation–efficiency trade-off to be separated from changes in the supplied observation scale. Writing hθ(β) = θg (β), we use 

hλθ (β) = min 

> u
> {

θg (u) + 12λ∥u − β∥22

> }

. (12) Its gradient is 

∇hλθ (β) = 1

λ

> {

β − prox λθg (β)}

, (13) which is 1 /λ -Lipschitz. We define 

Uθ,λ (β) = f (β) + hλθ (β), πθ,λ (β | y) ∝ e−Uθ,λ (β). (14) MYULA Durmus et al. (2018); Pereyra (2016) is built upon an Euler–Maruyama discretisation of the overdamped Langevin diffusion associated with Uθ,λ :

β(k+1) = β(k) − δ∇Uθ,λ (β(k)) + √2δ ξ (k+1) , ξ(k+1) i.i.d. 

∼ N (0 , I p), (15) 7with timestep δ > 0. In our setting, the recursion is 

β(k+1) = β(k) − δ

> [

∇f (β(k)) + 1

λ

> {

β(k) − prox λθg (β(k))}]

+ √2δ ξ (k+1) , ξ(k+1) i.i.d. 

∼ N (0 , I p). (16) The continuous-time diffusion has πθ,λ as its invariant distribution under the usual regularity conditions. The unadjusted Euler chain introduces a further finite-step approximation, so we distinguish the nonsmoothed posterior πθ, the smoothed posterior πθ,λ and the invariant distribution of the discretised chain, denoted πθ,λ,δ . If ∇f is Lf -Lipschitz, then a global Lipschitz bound for 

∇Uθ,λ is 

Lλ = Lf + 1

λ. (17) The bound 0 < δ ≤ 1

Lλ

= 1

Lf + 1 /λ . (18) on the timestep ensures both numerical stability Pereyra et al. (2020) and the validity of the nonasymptotic MYULA analysis of Durmus et al. (2018), and the MYULA kernels used within the SAPG methodology of Fernandez Vidal et al. (2020). In the unconstrained Gaussian model, where 

f = f0,

Lf = λmax (X⊤X)̂

σ 2 . (19) For computational efficiency, it is necessary to use values of δ that are close to the stability limit (18), so we take 

δ = 0.9

Lf + 1 /λ . (20) Our default Moreau choice is 

rλ := λL f = 1 , λ = 1

Lf

, (21) for which Lλ = 2 Lf and hence 

δ = 0.92Lf

. (22) The three computational objects are consequently kept conceptually separate: 

πθ −→ πθ,λ −→ πθ,λ,δ ,

representing the nonsmooth posterior, the Moreau-smoothed posterior and the finite-step unadjusted chain, respectively. A Metropolis–Hastings correction could instead be added, yielding a Metropolis-Adjusted Langevin Algorithm (MALA)-type kernel that removes the finite-step discretisation bias 8with respect to the smoothed target πθ,λ (though not the Moreau approximation itself), at the cost of an accept–reject step; we retain MYULA here for computational efficiency. 

## 2.3 Empirical Bayes calibration and affine information 

With the observation scale fixed at the preceding stage, we estimate the global shrinkage parameter by maximum marginal likelihood, ̂

θ ∈ arg max  

> θ∈Θ

π(y | θ), π(y | θ) = 

> ∫

π(y | β)π(β | θ) dβ, (23) over a compact interval Θ ⊂ (0 , ∞). Once ̂ θ has been obtained, it is held fixed for the subsequent MAP and posterior calculations. The computational difficulty in (23) is not the one-dimensional optimisation itself, but evaluating the marginal-likelihood score without access to the integral in closed form. SAPG De Bortoli et al. (2020); Fernandez Vidal et al. (2020) addresses this through a Fisher-identity representation of the score and a stochastic-approximation update whose expectation is estimated by a short proximal Markov chain. To make the quantity used in this paper explicit, let C denote the support of the prior, with intrinsic dimension d, and let μd denote the induced 

d-dimensional Lebesgue measure on C. We write 

ZC (θ) = 

> ∫
> C

exp {− θg (β)} dμ d(β)for its normalising constant. The marginal-likelihood derivative satisfies 

∂∂θ log π(y | θ) = −Eθ[g(β) | y] − ∂∂θ log ZC (θ). (24) For a one-homogeneous penalty, g(tβ ) = tg (β), on a d-dimensional linear support, the change of variables u = θβ gives 

ZC (θ) = θ−dZC (1) .

Hence, in logarithmic coordinates η = log θ,

∂∂η log π(y | eη) = d − θ Eθ[g(β) | y] . (25) For the unconstrained Laplace prior, C = Rp, d = p, g(β) = ∥β∥1, and ZC (θ) = (2 /θ )p.9At iteration k, a short MYULA chain at the current θk = eηk provides states {β(ℓ) 

> k

}mk

> ℓ=1

. Writing 

gk = 1

mkmk∑

> ℓ=1

g(β(ℓ) 

> k

),̂ ∆k = d − θkgk,

we use the projected Robbins–Monro recursion 

ηk+1 = Π log Θ 

> {

ηk + ρk̂ ∆k

> }

, ρk = ck + k0

, (26) followed by a tail/Polyak–Ruppert average of the resulting parameter path. Algorithm 1 summarises the calculation. 

Algorithm 1 SAPG calibration of a homogeneous Laplace scale 

Require: y, X, ̂ σ2, geometry-specific f , intrinsic dimension d, initial θ0, bounds Θ, steps ρk. 

> 1:

Initialise a chain state β0 and η0 = log θ0. 

> 2:

for k = 0 , . . . , K − 1 do  

> 3:

At θk = eηk , advance a short MYULA chain and collect mk states.  

> 4:

gk ← m−1 

> k
> ∑mk
> ℓ=1

g(β(ℓ) 

> k

).  

> 5: ̂

∆k ← d − θkgk. 

> 6:

ηk+1 ← Πlog Θ {ηk + ρk̂ ∆k}. 

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

Return a tail/Polyak–Ruppert average as ̂ θ.The simple score in (25) is a consequence of one-homogeneity, not a requirement of the broader optimisation–sampling framework. For example, an elastic net prior with fixed mixing parameter still has an explicit proximal map, so the FISTA and proximal MCMC steps remain straightforward. Its empirical Bayes update can use the general Fisher/SAPG identity (24) with the appropriate derivative of the prior normalising constant in place of the term d/θ ; if both elastic net penalty parameters are estimated, the stochastic-approximation update becomes multivariate, but can still be treated by other variants of SAPG already outlined in Fernandez Vidal et al. (2020). 

Hard homogeneous constraints For a hard linear restriction 

C0 = {β : Aβ = 0 }, d = p − rank( A),

10 the support is a linear subspace, so the same scaling argument applies with its intrinsic dimension 

d. In particular, under the sum-zero condition 1⊤β = 0, the correct score in (25) uses d = p − 1, not p. The same intrinsic dimension enters the natural scale-matching initialisation 

θ0 = dg(βref ). (27) Here βref is a preliminary reference fit used only to set the initial shrinkage scale; the experiment-specific choices are given in the supplement. The short MYULA chain used inside SAPG is run within C0, using the projected smooth gradient, projected Gaussian innovation and constrained proximal map; the explicit update and implementation details are given in the supplementary material. A paired numerical verification reported there, deliberately replaces d = p − 1 by the ambient value p in the sum-zero example. 

Nonhomogeneous affine information The same argument cannot simply be transferred to an affine slice 

Cb = {β : Aβ = b}, b̸ = 0 .

Indeed, under the rescaling u = θβ , the constraint becomes Au = θb , so the integration domain itself depends on θ and ZCb (θ) does not factor as θ−dZCb (1). A dimension-only contribution to the SAPG score is therefore no longer available. Rather than define the Laplace prior directly on this moving affine slice, we retain the prior on ambient Rp and impose the nonhomogeneous relation softly through the Gaussian pseudo-observation 

fτc (β) = 12σ2 ∥y − Xβ ∥22 + 12τ 2

> c

∥Aβ − b∥22. (28) The prior normalising constant then remains proportional to θ−p, so (25) continues to use d = p,while τc controls both the strength of the affine information and the additional curvature introduced by the quadratic affine term. Section 3.2 studies these two consequences separately. For the unconstrained and soft affine cases we likewise use d = p in (27); the choices of βref ,projection bounds and averaging windows used in the experiments are recorded in the supplementary material. We note that the exact score (25) belongs to the nonsmoothed model, whereas its posterior expectation is estimated with the inexact MYULA kernel described in Section 2.2. Consequently, ̂ θ

can inherit some dependence on the Moreau parameter λ. We retain the nonsmoothed marginal likelihood as the empirical Bayes target and assess this numerical dependence separately. 11 2.4 MAP estimation and role in selection 

The nonsmoothed MAP has two roles. It is the primary point estimator under the fitted empirical Bayes model, and its joint sparse configuration provides the candidate set and magnitude anchor for the later selection rule. The posterior gates therefore add uncertainty information without replacing the MAP as the coefficient estimator. Our index-tracking application Roxanas (2025) is an example where the MAP is more explicitly an intermediate decision vector because portfolio weights or trades must still be converted into an implementable constrained action; here the MAP itself remains the reported point estimate, but the applicability of the method is broader. Conditional on ( ̂σ2,̂ θ), the primary estimator is ̂

βMAP ∈ arg min  

> β

{f (β) + ̂ θ∥β∥1}, (29) where f is the active smooth term defined in subsection 2.2. We compute (29) by FISTA Beck and Teboulle (2009). If ∇f is Lf -Lipschitz, the unconstrained and soft affine iterations use γ = 1 /L f

and, at the extrapolated point zk,

βk+1 = prox γ̂ θg 

> (

zk − γ∇f (zk))

. (30) For g(β) = ∥β∥1, this is coordinatewise soft thresholding at level γ̂ θ.The empirical Bayes estimate ̂ θ is obtained with a MYULA approximation and can therefore depend on the Moreau parameter λ. Once ̂ θ is fixed, however, FISTA in (29) optimises the original nonsmoothed objective. For comparison, the smoothed posterior has mode ̂

βMAP ,λ ∈ arg min 

> β
> {

f (β) + hλ̂ 

> θ

(β)}

. (31) In general ̂ βMAP ,λ ̸ =̂ βMAP . We report the nonsmoothed MAP and use the smoothed mode only to audit the approximation. In particular, we monitor 

D2(λ) = ∥̂βMAP ,λ −̂ βMAP ∥2

1 + ∥̂ βMAP ∥2

, D∞(λ) = ∥̂ βMAP ,λ −̂ βMAP ∥∞. (32) For the hard sum-zero constraint C0 = {β : 1⊤β = 0 }, the constrained proximal map is prox C0 

> tθ ∥·∥ 1

(v) = arg min  

> u∈C0
> {

12∥u − v∥22 + tθ ∥u∥1

> }

. (33) 12 Its KKT representation is 

uj = Stθ (vj − ν),

> p∑
> j=1

Stθ (vj − ν) = 0 , (34) where Sa(x) = sign( x)( |x| − a)+ is the scalar soft-thresholding operator and the scalar ν is obtained by bisection Zhou et al. (2024, e.g., Section 5.1). FISTA then operates directly in C0:

βk+1 = prox C0 

> γ̂θg
> (

zk − γP C0 ∇f0(zk))

, (35) with 

PC0 = I − 1

p11 ⊤. (36) 

## 2.5 Posterior-informed sparse decisions 

A continuous Laplace posterior does not contain inclusion indicators, and MAP nonzero status alone need not imply practical relevance. We therefore separate shrinkage from the final support decision, following the general idea of fitting a continuous model first and sparsifying a posterior summary afterward Bondell and Reich (2012); Hahn and Carvalho (2015); Piironen, Paasiniemi, and Vehtari (2020). The nonsmoothed MAP supplies the joint magnitude anchor, while MYULA provides posterior-scale information from the smoothed approximation. From retained MYULA draws, we define ̂

sj (λ) = sd π̂θ,λ 

(βj | y), j = 1 , . . . , p. (37) We use the robust global scale 

τpost (λ; k) = k median 1≤j≤p̂ sj (λ), (38) which provides a common posterior scale in coefficient units while preventing a small number of coordinates with very large marginal posterior standard deviations from setting the threshold for all variables. We define the activation probability ̂

πj (λ; k) = Pr 

> π̂θ,λ

(|βj | ≥ τpost (λ; k) | y) , (39) estimated by Monte Carlo frequencies. 13 A marginal activation probability can be large for two different reasons: the posterior may be centred away from zero, or it may simply be very spread out. To make the latter point explicit, suppose for illustration that the marginal posterior of one coefficient is approximately 

βj | y ≈ N (μj , s 2 

> j

).

For a fixed practical threshold τ > 0, Pr( |βj | ≥ τ | y) = Φ  

> (

−τ − μj

sj

> )

+ 1 − Φ 

> (

τ − μj

sj

> )

,

where Φ is the standard normal distribution function. If μj = 0, this becomes 2

> {

1 − Φ 

> (

τsj

> )}

,

which increases with sj (and hence with the posterior variance s2 

> j

) for fixed τ . These are “diffuse” in the sense that a weakly identified coordinate can place substantial posterior mass beyond ±τ

because its marginal variance is large, even when it is centred near zero. The median in (38) limits the influence of a small number of such coordinates on the common threshold, while the MAP magnitude gate below prevents marginal spread alone from triggering selection. The selected support is ̂

Sλ(k, π ⋆) = {

j : |̂βMAP ,j | ≥ τpost (λ; k),̂ πj (λ; k) ≥ π⋆

> }

. (40) We report 

k ∈ { 2, 2.5, 3}, π⋆ ∈ { 0.5, 0.75 , 0.9},

with (2 .5, 0.75) as the reference setting. The MAP gate is tied to the nonsmoothed fitted model, whereas the posterior scale and activation probability depend on the Moreau approximation. Conditional on passing the MAP magnitude gate, the probability threshold has a simple coordinatewise decision-theoretic interpretation. Let 

Ej (λ; k) = {| βj | ≥ τpost (λ; k)} (41) denote the event that coefficient j is practically active, and let aj ∈ { 0, 1} denote the decision to exclude ( aj = 0) or select ( aj = 1) that coordinate. Let cFP > 0 be the loss assigned to selecting a 14 practically inactive coefficient and cFN > 0 the loss assigned to excluding a practically active one. With I(·) denoting the indicator function, consider 

L(aj , E j ) = cFP aj I(Ecj ) + cFN (1 − aj )I(Ej ). (42) The posterior expected losses of selection and exclusion are therefore 

cFP Pr( Ecj | y) and cFN Pr( Ej | y),

respectively. The Bayes action selects j when Pr( Ej | y) ≥ cFP 

cFP + cFN 

. (43) Thus π⋆ can be read as a relative false-inclusion/false-exclusion cost threshold. For example, 

π⋆ = 0 .75 corresponds to assigning a false inclusion three times the loss of a false exclusion at this coordinatewise decision stage. Because the terminal decision depends on Monte Carlo estimates of (38) and (39), we supplement standard autocorrelation and effective-sample-size diagnostics with a decision-level quantity. For retained draw m, define the binary activation sequence 

I(m) 

> j

(λ; k) = I{

|β(m) 

> j

| ≥ τpost (λ; k)}

.

Then ̂ πj (λ; k) is the sample mean of this sequence, and MCSE {̂πj (λ; k)} is the Monte Carlo standard error of that mean, accounting for serial dependence through the effective sample size. We define 

Dj (λ; k, π ⋆) = |̂πj (λ; k) − π⋆|

MCSE {̂ πj (λ; k)}. (44) We report the minimum Dj over all coordinates and, more importantly, over coordinates that pass the MAP magnitude gate. If I(m) 

> j

(λ; k) is constant over the retained draws, its estimated variance and hence its estimated MCSE are zero. For the interior probability thresholds used here, the empirical activation probability is then either zero or one, so the retained run exhibits no Monte Carlo ambiguity about which side of the probability gate that coordinate lies on. This should not be interpreted as posterior certainty; it is a statement about Monte Carlo resolution conditional on the sampled run and is considered together with the usual mixing diagnostics. 15 2.6 Geometry-aware preconditioning 

The scalar-step MYULA update introduced above is most effective when the posterior curvature is reasonably balanced across directions. This need not hold in regression problems: the likelihood may be poorly scaled across coordinates, while a strong soft affine relation can introduce a small number of directions whose curvature is much larger than that of the remaining parameter space. Both effects can restrict the admissible timestep and degrade mixing in directions that are not themselves stiff. We therefore use preconditioning as a numerical device matched to the source of the anisotropy. Let Uθ,λ denote the smoothed negative log-posterior and let M be a fixed symmetric positive-definite matrix. The corresponding preconditioned Langevin diffusion is 

dβ t = −M ∇Uθ,λ (βt) dt + √2M dW t,

which has the same invariant distribution as the unpreconditioned diffusion. Its Euler discretisation is 

β(k+1) = β(k) − δM ∇Uθ,λ 

> (

β(k))

+ √2δM ξ (k+1) , ξ(k+1) ∼ N (0 , I p).

Thus a constant preconditioner changes the geometry in which the target is explored, without changing the intended smoothed posterior. The timestep must nevertheless be retuned in the transformed geometry. For a quadratic smooth term with Hessian Hf , we denote the corresponding smooth-gradient Lipschitz constant in the preconditioned geometry by 

Lf,M = λmax 

> (

M 1/2Hf M 1/2)

.

Diagonal scaling. When poor conditioning is distributed across coordinates, one can use a diagonal, or Jacobi, approximation to the Hessian of the smooth term. Writing Hf = ∇2f for the Hessian of the quadratic smooth term, we take 

Dε = diag( Hf ) + εI p, ε > 0, MJ = D−1 

> ε

,

where ε is a small ridge term that prevents zero or very small diagonal entries from producing unstable inverse rescaling. Up to an overall scalar normalisation that can be absorbed into δ, this rescales coordinates according to the diagonal entries of Hf and is inexpensive to construct even when p is large. It is useful when the main numerical difficulty is heterogeneous marginal scaling; being diagonal, it is not intended to remove strong off-diagonal dependence completely. 16 Low-rank directional correction. A different geometry arises from a soft affine relation. For a single condition a⊤β = b, the pseudo-observation adds 12τ 2

> c

(a⊤β − b)2

to the smooth potential and hence contributes the rank-one Hessian term τ −2 

> c

aa ⊤. Let 

u = a

∥a∥2

, P∥ = uu ⊤, P⊥ = I − P∥.

When the largest eigenvalue of the smooth Hessian is driven primarily by the soft affine term, it is useful to distinguish the overall smooth-gradient Lipschitz constant from the corresponding constant within the tangent space. For this quadratic problem, define 

Lf = λmax (Hf ), L⊥ = sup 

> v⊥u
> ∥v∥2=1

v⊤Hf v. 

Thus Lf is the largest eigenvalue of the smooth Hessian, while L⊥ is its largest Rayleigh quotient over directions tangent to the affine hyperplane. We then use 

Mϕ = P⊥ + ϕP ∥, ϕ = min 

> {

1, L⊥

Lf

> }

.

The update therefore leaves tangent directions unchanged while damping movement in the single stiff direction enough to bring its numerical scale closer to the rest of the problem. The same idea extends to several affine relations by replacing P∥ with the projector onto the relevant low-dimensional constraint subspace. There is one additional interaction with Moreau smoothing. If the soft affine Hessian term materially increases Lf , the default choice λ = 1 /L f also makes the Moreau approximation unnecessarily sharp in the better-scaled tangent directions. In that case we decouple the two scales and use the tangent-space constant L⊥ to set the Moreau parameter, while the timestep is chosen from the Lipschitz bound in the preconditioned geometry. Hence the two preconditioners address different mechanisms: diagonal scaling treats broadly distributed coordinatewise imbalance, whereas the projector construction treats identifiable low-rank stiffness. We assess the effect of preconditioning through mixing, effective sample size and the Monte Carlo precision of the posterior quantities entering the final decision rule. 17 3 Numerical studies 

Study 1 provides the unconstrained baseline in both n > p and p > n regimes. Study 2 examines the soft affine extension and its numerical geometry. Study 3 returns to an unconstrained real-data problem. The supplement contains the hard-constraint calibration check and the observation-scale/Moreau sensitivity study. Unless stated otherwise, selection results use ( k, π ⋆) = (2 .5, 0.75) as the reference setting and report the full grid as a sensitivity analysis. 

## 3.1 Study 1: End-to-end sparse regression 

Study 1 evaluates the complete workflow under a known sparse ground truth. We use the same signal pattern in an overdetermined and an underdetermined regime and report likelihood-scale calibration, MAP estimation and prediction, sparse selection, and decision-level Monte Carlo precision. Rows of the Gaussian design are generated with AR(1) covariance Σ jk = 0 .4|j−k|, after which each realised predictor column is rescaled to ∥Xj ∥2 = √n. The response follows y = Xβ ⋆ + ε,with ε ∼ N (0 , I n), so that σ = 1. There are ten nonzero coefficients, with alternating signs and decreasing magnitudes, rescaled so that the population signal-to-noise ratio satisfies 

β⋆⊤Σβ⋆

σ2 = 3 .

We consider (n, p ) = (500 , 200) and (n, p ) = (200 , 500) ,

with R = 100 independently generated datasets in each regime; the additional predictors in the high-dimensional regime are null. The decision rule is evaluated over k ∈ { 2, 2.5, 3} and 

π⋆ ∈ { 0.50 , 0.75 , 0.90 }, with (2 .5, 0.75) used only as a reference operating point. SAPG uses 4000 iterations with tail averaging from iteration 2000. The initial calculation retained 4000 MYULA draws after burn-in and was subsequently refined to 40 ,000 retained draws with all upstream quantities fixed. The full settings and the complete decision grid are given in the supplementary material. Throughout the numerical studies, TPR denotes true-positive rate, FDR false-discovery rate, and support RMSE the root mean squared coefficient error restricted to the true support. The two regimes use the two scale-estimation branches of subsection 2.1. When n > p , the 18 classical residual estimator is centred close to the truth: across the R = 100 datasets, mean( ̂σ/σ ) = 0 .9979 , sd( ̂ σ/σ ) = 0 .0415 .

The high-dimensional branch required more care. In an initial five-dataset pilot, the raw scaled Lasso estimate was materially inflated, with mean ̂ σSL = 1 .514, and the initially narrow SAPG projection interval also produced boundary hits. Widening the projection interval removed this numerical artefact, but selection remained weak when the inflated scale was retained. Replacing the estimated scale by the true σ = 1 recovered much of the lost sensitivity and improved prediction performance. This separated the two effects and motivated a feasible correction to the scale estimate: we use the scaled Lasso only to identify a provisional support, refit OLS on that support, and estimate σ2 from the refitted residuals as in (8). In the same five datasets, this reduced the mean estimated scale from 1 .514 to 1 .138, with behaviour much closer to the true-noise comparison. Accordingly, the reported R = 100 experiment uses the post-selection OLS scale, while the scaled Lasso coefficients themselves play no role beyond defining the provisional support. In the 

p > n datasets, the raw scaled Lasso scale has mean 1 .4820, whereas the post-OLS estimate has mean 1 .1173 and standard deviation 0 .0776. The remaining upward displacement is consistent with provisional supports that omit weak signals; the supplementary analysis records their composition explicitly. This sequence is important for the interpretation of the later studies as it clarifies the role of the observation-scale estimate in the full workflow. Table 1 summarises the output at the reference decision setting, using the final 40 ,000-draw posterior calculations for all selection quantities. Relative L2 error and true-support RMSE refer to the nonsmoothed MAP, while prediction risk is evaluated under the population design covariance. Table 1: Study 1 results at the reference setting ( k, π ⋆) = (2 .5, 0.75). Parentheses give standard errors over R = 100 datasets; selection uses the 40 ,000-draw MYULA run.                                 

> Regime ̂σ/σ ̂θRel. L2Supp. RMSE Pred. risk TPR FDR Size Exact
> n= 500 , p = 200 0.998 (.004) 15.711 (.041) 0.215 (.003) 0.065 (.001) 0.130 (.003) 0.989 (.003) 0.006 (.002) 9.96 (.04) 0.830 (.038)
> n= 200 , p = 500 1.117 (.008) 17.334 (.067) 0.343 (.004) 0.165 (.003) 0.347 (.009) 0.429 (.012) 0.000 (.000) 4.29 (.12) 0.000 (.000)

The low-dimensional regime, n > p , behaves as a well-informed sparse regression problem. The noise scale is accurately calibrated, estimation and prediction errors remain moderate, and the reference rule recovers on average 98 .9% of the true variables with FDR 0 .0065; the exact 19 ten-variable support is recovered in 83% of datasets. The high-dimensional regime, p ≥ n, is qualitatively different. Estimation and prediction remain meaningful, but the final decision at the reference setting, ( k, π ⋆) = (2 .5, 0.75), is conservative: it selects 4 .29 variables on average with TPR 0.429, but no false positives are observed in the 100 replications. Signal-wise selection frequencies decrease almost monotonically with true coefficient magnitude, from 0 .96 for the largest signal to zero for the smallest. The loss of exact support recovery is therefore driven by omissions of progressively weaker signals, rather than by indiscriminate inclusion of zero coordinates. Figure 1 makes the two-stage mechanism explicit in the high-dimensional regime: MAP eligibility remains high for moderate signals, while the posterior activation gate progressively removes weaker effects. 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7       

> True signal magnitude | β⋆
> j|
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Frequency across 100 datasets
> Signal-wise selection profile, n= 200, p= 500
> Passes MAP magnitude gate Final selection

Figure 1: Signal-wise behaviour at the reference decision rule in the high-dimensional regime. For each true signal, the figure shows the frequency with which it passes the MAP magnitude gate and the frequency with which it is retained by the complete MAP-plus-posterior rule. The full 3 × 3 decision grid is obtained by post-processing the same posterior sample; neither the model nor the empirical Bayes calibration is refitted when k or π⋆ changes. In the low-dimensional regime, the grid displays the expected sensitivity–specificity tradeoff: the permissive setting (2 , 0.50) has TPR 1 and FDR 0 .105, while more stringent settings almost eliminate false discoveries with only a modest loss of sensitivity. In the high-dimensional regime, FDR is zero over almost the whole grid; TPR ranges from 0 .675 at (2 , 0.50) to 0 .229 at (3 , 0.90). Thus, the two decision parameters mainly 20 control how much weak-signal sensitivity is retained once the problem becomes information-limited. Increasing the retained MYULA sample from 4000 to 40 ,000 draws separates the statistical behaviour above from finite Monte Carlo precision. Median coordinate ESS increases from 212 to 2093 in the n > p regime and from 134 to 1269 in the p > n regime, while aggregate TPR and FDR move by less than one percentage point. Let ̂ S4k and ̂ S40 k denote the selected sets obtained from the shorter and longer posterior runs. These sets are identical in 96% of low-dimensional replicates and 74% of high-dimensional replicates; the mean values of |̂S4k△̂ S40 k|, the number of coordinates selected in exactly one of the two runs, are only 0 .04 and 0 .33, respectively. The decision-aware diagnostic Dj , defined in (44), measures the distance between the estimated activation probability for coefficient j and the probability threshold π⋆, in Monte Carlo standard-error units. For each replicate, we restrict attention to coordinates that pass the MAP magnitude gate and record 

Dmin ,elig = min   

> j:|̂βMAP ,j |≥ τpost

Dj .

Thus, Dmin ,elig measures how close the most decision-sensitive MAP-eligible coefficient is to the posterior-probability boundary: a small value means that at least one eligible coefficient has an activation probability close to π⋆ relative to its Monte Carlo uncertainty. The median of this quantity increases from 7 .03 to 27 .87 in the n > p regime and from 0 .81 to 2 .16 in the p > n regime. Even after 40 ,000 draws, 46% of the high-dimensional replicates contain at least one MAP-eligible coordinate within two MCSE units of the activation threshold. Thus, the aggregate recovery rates are stable, while individual high-dimensional inclusion decisions can remain close enough to the probability gate for Monte Carlo precision to matter. Increasing the retained sample tenfold was computationally inexpensive with MYULA in these experiments; environment-specific timings are reported in the supplement. Figure 2 visualises the same distinction: the longer posterior run moves the most decision-sensitive eligible coordinates farther from the probability boundary in Monte Carlo standard-error units. 21 n > p      

> 4k
> n>p
> 40k
> p>n
> 4k
> p>n
> 40k 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> Smallest eligible  Dj (MCSE units)
> Monte Carlo precision near the probability gate
> Two MCSE from probability boundary

Figure 2: Monte Carlo precision of the posterior-probability gate under the 4000- and 40 ,000-draw calculations. The plotted quantity is the smallest Dj among MAP-eligible coordinates in each replicate; the dashed line marks two Monte Carlo standard errors from the probability threshold. In conclusion, Study 1 establishes the baseline behaviour used by the remaining experiments. It shows that the complete pipeline is well behaved in the n > p regime, that the high-dimensional difficulty is primarily conservative loss of weak signals, and that nuisance-scale calibration and posterior Monte Carlo error can be diagnosed separately. 

## 3.2 Study 2: Soft affine information and numerical geometry 

Affine information arises naturally when coefficients represent constrained decisions. In our index-tracking application Roxanas (2025), construction uses a soft sum-to-one condition and rebalancing uses hard self-financing changes with 1⊤∆w = 0. Here we isolate the soft nonhomogeneous case in a controlled regression experiment. We examine how stronger sum-to-one information changes calibration, estimation and selection, and how the same term changes the geometry seen by the Langevin sampler. The hard homogeneous calibration is checked separately in the supplement. We use R = 100 independently generated datasets with n = 200, p = 100, known σ = 1, and eight nonzero coefficients satisfying 1⊤β⋆ = 1. The smooth potential is augmented by the Gaussian 22 pseudo-observation term 12τ 2

> c
> (

1⊤β − 1)2

that encodes the constraint. Writing L0 = λmax (X⊤X), we index the strength of the affine information by 

κc = pτ 2 

> c

L0

, κc ∈ { 0, 0.1, 1, 10 }.

This parameter has a direct geometric interpretation: the rank-one affine Hessian τ −2 

> c

11 ⊤ has nonzero eigenvalue p/τ 2 

> c

= κcL0. Thus κc compares the curvature introduced in the sum direction with the baseline likelihood-curvature scale; κc = 0 corresponds to omitting the pseudo-observation. Because the relation is imposed softly rather than by restricting the prior support, the prior remains on the ambient space and the SAPG score continues to use d = p throughout. The full simulation settings and decision grids are reported in the supplement. The empirical Bayes scale changes only moderately as the affine information strengthens, from mean ̂ θ = 9 .772 at κc = 0 to 10 .346 at κc = 10. The effect on adherence to the supplied relation is much larger: the mean posterior value of |1⊤β − 1| decreases from 0 .685 to 0 .112. Point estimation and selection improve more modestly. MAP relative L2 error falls from 0 .2557 to 0 .2482, while at the reference decision rule, ( k, π ⋆) = (2 .5, 0.75), mean TPR increases from 0 .8025 to 0 .8200; FDR remains below 0 .003 at both endpoints. Table 2 summarises the final posterior calculation used for each value of κc. Here Med. ESS is the ensemble median of the coordinatewise median effective sample size, Weak-tangent ESS is the ensemble median of the effective sample size after projection onto the least-curved tangent-space eigendirection, and Delig is the median, across datasets, of the smallest Dj among MAP-eligible coordinates. Table 2: Study 2 results at ( k, π ⋆) = (2 .5, 0.75). The κc = 10 row uses the geometry-aware calculation; the baseline scalar-step calculation is reported in the supplement.                                            

> κĉθMAP rel. L2E|1⊤β−1|Med. ESS Weak-tangent ESS TPR FDR Delig
> 09.772 0.2557 0.6851 301.6 146.5 0.8025 0.00268 5.49 0.1 9.785 0.2549 0.5955 302.9 146.9 0.8063 0.00268 5.49 19.976 0.2518 0.3418 212.7 106.5 0.8150 0.00125 4.31 10 10.346 0.2482 0.1118 302.7 160.8 0.8200 0.00250 5.03

23 As discussed in Sections 1 and 2, the same affine information that improves adherence also changes the numerical problem. When MYULA is used without geometry-aware preconditioning, a single Euclidean timestep is chosen from the global smoothness constant Lf . The effect is already visible at κc = 1 as mixing deterioration: median coordinate ESS falls from about 302 to 213. At 

κc = 10, it becomes pronounced. Across the ensemble, 

Lf

L⊥

= 10 .3977 on average, where L⊥ is the smooth curvature restricted to the tangent space orthogonal to 1.More explicitly, if v1 is the unit leading eigenvector of the smooth Hessian and u = 1/√p is the unit sum direction, then the ensemble mean of |v⊤ 

> 1

u|2 is 0 .999366. Thus the direction of largest curvature is, to numerical accuracy, almost parallel to the sum direction. The scalar timestep is therefore governed almost entirely by this single stiff direction. Median coordinate ESS falls to 33 .8, the median ESS in the weakest tangent direction to 20 .1, and the median minimum decision distance among MAP-eligible variables to 1 .25. In contrast, the sum direction itself has median ESS above 1100. Therefore, the difficulty is not failing to explore the affine direction; it is that curvature in that direction forces the rest of the sampler to evolve much more slowly. For κc = 10 we consequently use the rank-one preconditioning matrix from Section 2.6, 

Mϕ = P⊥ + ϕP ∥, ϕ = min {1, L ⊥/L f },

and set the Moreau scale from the tangent curvature L⊥ rather than from the affine-dominated 

Lf . The mean ϕ is 0 .0962, and in the transformed geometry the mean smooth-curvature ratio is reduced to Lf,M /L ⊥ = 1 .022. Using Mϕ with λ fixed changes the geometry of the Langevin dynamics while leaving the intended smoothed posterior unchanged. Here we additionally replace the default λ = 1 /L f by λ = 1 /L ⊥. Since L⊥ < L f , this uses a larger Moreau parameter and therefore changes the smoothed approximation itself, not only how that approximation is explored. For this reason, we designed this branch primarily as a geometry-aware posterior calculation rather than as a pure preconditioner-only comparison; the timestep choice is audited separately in the supplement. The resulting gain in Monte Carlo reliability is large. Relative to the baseline scalar-step κc = 10 calculation, median coordinate ESS increases from 33 .8 to 302 .7, the median minimum coordinate ESS from 9 .1 to 127 .4, and weak-tangent ESS from 20 .1 to 160 .8. The median minimum Dj among 24 MAP-eligible variables increases from 1 .25 to 5 .03. Taking, in each dataset, the MAP-eligible coordinate whose activation probability lies closest to the posterior-probability threshold, the median standardised separation from that threshold increases from about 1 .25 to about 5 Monte Carlo standard errors. Thus the probability-gate decisions are much better resolved relative to Monte Carlo error. In contrast, the reported selection summaries move very little: mean selected-set size changes from 6 .65 to 6 .58, mean TPR from 0 .825 to 0 .820, and mean FDR from 0 .0063 to 0.0025. Figure 3 makes the geometry of the κc = 10 calculation more explicit across the R = 100 datasets. The weak- and strong-tangent summaries are the ESS values along the least- and most-curved eigendirections of the smooth Hessian restricted to the tangent space, while the median-coordinate ESS gives a robust summary of typical coordinatewise mixing. The sum-direction ESS isolates the affine normal direction u = 1/√p. Without preconditioning, the sum direction itself is already explored efficiently, whereas mixing deteriorates substantially in the tangent directions and across the original coordinates. Preconditioning largely restores that exploration while leaving the sum-direction ESS at the same high order. Weak tangent Median coordinate ESS Strong tangent Sum direction 10 1

> 10 2
> 10 3
> Effective sample size
> Directional ESS: baseline vs geometry-aware
> Without preconditioning With preconditioning

Figure 3: Directional effective sample sizes at κc = 10, across R = 100 datasets, with and without preconditioning. The four summaries are the weak-tangent, median-coordinate, strong-tangent and sum-direction ESS. 25 Study 2 therefore separates two consequences of softly specifying affine information. Strengthen-ing the soft relation genuinely changes the fitted posterior and substantially improves adherence to the relation, with only modest changes in estimation and support recovery. At the same time, its rank-one curvature can make a scalar-step posterior calculation unnecessarily inefficient. Matching the numerical geometry to that low-rank structure restores decision-level Monte Carlo precision without materially changing the sparse conclusion. 

## 3.3 Study 3: Diabetes data and external benchmarking 

Study 3 applies the complete workflow to a real regression problem. We examine the calibration, posterior computation, stability of the sparse decision across the prespecified grid, and agreement with external Bayesian analyses of the same data. We worked with the diabetes data used by Efron et al. (2004). The outcome there is a quantitative measure of disease progression over a year, and the covariates are Age, Sex, Body Mass Index (BMI), average Blood Pressure (BP), and six blood serum measurements (labelled S1-S6). There are n = 442 observations and p = 10 predictors; the response is centred and divided by its sample standard deviation, and the predictors are used as supplied. The design is full rank, while the Gram matrix has condition number about 470. The largest absolute pairwise predictor correlation is approximately 0 .897. The model is therefore small enough to remain fully interpretable, but contains weak coefficient-attribution directions that make posterior uncertainty nontrivial. Accounting for the fitted intercept through the residual degrees of freedom, the classical residual estimator gives ̂ σ2 = 0 .493440 . The extended empirical Bayes calculation gave ̂ θ = 0 .337289 , which was then fixed for all downstream calculations; the SAPG settings and convergence diagnostics are reported in the supplement. We retained the default Moreau choice λ = 1 /L f . In this example, the nonsmoothed FISTA MAP had eight nonzero coordinates, while the corresponding smoothed mode was numerically very close; the detailed mode comparison is also reported in the supplement. The initial scalar-step MYULA run showed slow exploration in the weakest likelihood directions, but the sampler is sufficiently computationally cheap here that extending the run was preferable to introducing an additional preconditioner or retuning λ. The final calculation therefore retained the same fitted model, Moreau scale and sampler geometry, with a longer simulation horizon. Median 26 coordinate ESS was 1589 .6, the minimum coordinate ESS was 198 .8, and the weakest-likelihood-direction ESS was 192 .2. The full short-versus-long audit is given in the supplement. The long-chain 95% marginal credible intervals exclude zero for Sex, BMI, BP, and S5. The terminal sparse action is stricter than interval zero-exclusion because it also applies the practical magnitude threshold and posterior activation gate from subsection 2.5. At the reference operating point ( k, π ⋆) = (2 .5, 0.75), the selected support is 

{BMI , BP , S5 }.

Thus, the posterior-informed decision reduces the eight-coordinate nonsmoothed MAP support to three coordinates at the reference operating point. The full prespecified grid in Table 3 gives a more informative stability summary: BMI and S5 are selected in all nine settings, blood pressure in eight, Sex in two, and every other variable in none. Table 3: Diabetes selection grid. The reference setting ( k, π ⋆) = (2 .5, 0.75) is shown in bold.                     

> π⋆=.50 π⋆=.75 π⋆=.90
> k= 2 .0Sex, BMI, BP, S5 Sex, BMI, BP, S5 BMI, BP, S5
> k= 2 .5BMI, BP, S5 BMI, BP, S5 BMI, BP, S5
> k= 3 .0BMI, BP, S5 BMI, BP, S5 BMI, S5

Two coordinates show why the posterior stage adds information beyond the sparse MAP. For Sex, the 95% credible interval lies entirely below zero, but the MAP magnitude lies just below the reference practical threshold τpost . Its reference activation probability is only 0 .503, so Sex behaves as a practical-magnitude boundary case, and enters the selected support only at the less stringent 

k = 2 settings with π⋆ ≤ 0.75. Variable S3 shows the complementary mechanism: at k = 2 its MAP magnitude exceeds the practical threshold, but its posterior activation probability remains below 0 .5, so it is selected in none of the nine settings. The distinction between MAP eligibility and posterior-supported magnitude is therefore visible in the real-data example itself. The same operational data scaling is used in the public diabetes demonstration of Zhou et al. (2024). Their accompanying supplementary notebook stores the numerical interval output underlying its published comparison, so we reconstructed that comparison from the authors’ recorded numerical values rather than rerunning their mixed Julia/R analysis. Figure 4 appends the 27 interval from our long MYULA calculation (EB-Laplace + MYULA analysis) to the recorded 95% intervals for ProxMCMC, Bayesian lasso with and without reversible-jump selection, and horseshoe intervals, together with the selective-inference intervals reported in the same notebook across Age, Sex, BMI, BP and S1–S6. For the reconstructed benchmark methods, centre markers are interval midpoints used only for visual alignment. The benchmark reconstruction and all interval endpoints are documented in the supplement. The Bayesian interval comparisons show the same zero-exclusion pattern. ProxMCMC, Bayesian lasso with and without reversible-jump variable selection, the horseshoe, and the present analysis all give exactly the same 95% Bayesian zero-exclusion pattern: 

{Sex , BMI , BP , S5 }.

For the strongly identified coefficients BMI, BP and S5, the interval endpoints are also close across the Bayesian procedures. The largest differences occur in the correlated serum block, where the present analysis yields wider marginal credible intervals without changing the common zero-exclusion pattern. Selective inference additionally reports an interval excluding zero for S3, but those intervals are conditional frequentist objects and the associated lasso support solves a different selection problem. The interval differences in the correlated serum block are also consistent with the geometry of the regression problem. Strong predictor correlation creates weakly identified directions of the likelihood: some linear combinations of coefficients are well determined by the data, while movements along other combinations change the fitted response only slightly. Posterior mass can therefore extend substantially along these weak directions, and this spread is inherited by the marginal intervals of the individual coefficients even when prediction, or better-identified coefficient combinations, remain comparatively stable. Different prior and shrinkage constructions regularise these weak directions differently, so larger differences between Bayesian procedures are most naturally expected precisely in this part of the parameter space; in our calculation, extending MYULA greatly increased the effective sample size in the weakest likelihood directions, but the marginal posterior standard deviations did not decrease and, in fact, increased slightly on average. Study 3 therefore provides two complementary real-data checks. The posterior uncertainty from the calibrated proximal workflow is consistent with established Bayesian analyses of the same dataset, while the MAP-plus-posterior rule adds a separate practical-magnitude decision 28 Age Sex BMI BP S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 Predictor 7.5 

> 5.0
> 2.5
> 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 Coefficient
> ProxMCMC Bayesian lasso + RJ Bayesian lasso Horseshoe Selective inference Present method

Figure 4: 95% coefficient intervals for the diabetes data. Benchmark intervals are reconstructed from the public notebook of Zhou et al. (2024); the present intervals use the long MYULA run. Symbols mark interval midpoints only for visual alignment. layer. Reporting the full decision grid, rather than only its reference operating point, makes that distinction explicit. 

# 4 Discussion 

We develop a proximal empirical Bayes approach that turns a familiar convex sparse-regression model into a computationally efficient posterior-informed decision procedure. The same structure is reused across shrinkage calibration, MAP estimation and posterior simulation: the Laplace prior has a simple proximal map, the nonsmoothed MAP is obtained rapidly by first-order optimisation, and Moreau smoothing makes gradient-based posterior simulation straightforward. The method therefore adds uncertainty quantification and a separate support decision without requiring discrete model-space exploration or a high-dimensional hierarchy of local shrinkage parameters. Richer shrinkage priors can provide greater adaptivity, especially across heterogeneous signal sizes, but they also introduce additional modelling, calibration and computational choices and, more importantly, their specification can materially affect the resulting statistical decisions. Our results show that a 29 comparatively simple log-concave model can support a useful posterior analysis when these stages are separated carefully. The numerical studies support this positioning. In the n > p setting, the complete procedure recovers the sparse signal accurately and the reference decision rule has very low false discovery rates. In the p > n setting, the main difficulty is not an abundance of false positives but conservative loss of weak signals, with the preliminary likelihood-scale estimate playing an important role. The decision-aware Monte Carlo diagnostic separates this statistical limitation from uncertainty caused by a finite posterior run. Study 2 shows a second distinction: informative soft affine relations can improve the fitted model while simultaneously creating low-rank stiffness that slows a scalar-step Langevin calculation. Matching the sampling geometry to that structure greatly improves effective exploration with little change to the sparse decision. On the diabetes data, the resulting posterior intervals agree closely with several established Bayesian analyses, while the additional magnitude-and-probability rule yields a smaller practical support. This modularity is useful beyond the particular Laplace–MYULA implementation studied here. Observation-scale calibration, empirical Bayes shrinkage, the nonsmoothed MAP, posterior approximation and the terminal decision correspond to different statistical or computational objects, so each can be changed without redefining the whole procedure. The proximal optimisation and sampling components extend directly to other proper closed convex penalties with tractable proxi-mal maps, including elastic net penalties. Moreau smoothing is likewise not specific to MYULA and can be combined with other gradient-based samplers. The affine treatment extends the calibration to lower-dimensional homogeneous supports and provides a simple route for incorporating nonho-mogeneous affine information. When a Gaussian observation-noise interpretation is unavailable, the same architecture can instead be formulated with a generalised Bayes learning rate. There are also clear directions for further work. The present plug-in treatment of the observation and shrinkage scales does not propagate hyperparameter uncertainty, and a single global Laplace scale cannot adapt to heterogeneous signals as flexibly as global–local or richer hierarchical priors. The final gate is deliberately coordinatewise once the joint MAP has supplied the candidate configuration; decision rules based more directly on joint posterior geometry could be developed for strongly correlated problems. These extensions need not alter the central computational idea. The contribution of the present framework is to show that a simple convex sparse model can 30 retain the speed and numerical structure of regularised optimisation while supporting empirical Bayes calibration, posterior uncertainty, affine information and an auditable terminal selection decision. This provides a computationally efficient middle ground between reporting a penalised point estimate alone and fitting a substantially richer hierarchical selection model. 

# Data and code availability 

The diabetes data are publicly available through the sources associated with Efron et al. (2004) and the public notebook accompanying Zhou et al. (2024). Code for the reported synthetic experiments, the diabetes analysis and benchmark reconstruction is available at https://github .com/droxanas/ProxEBS_Sparse_Regression . The repository also contains the analysis scripts, fixed random seeds, and the diabetes and benchmark input files needed to reproduce the reported numerical results and figures. 

# Supplementary material 

The supplement contains full decision grids, additional SAPG and MYULA diagnostics, MAP-smoothing and preconditioning audits, the complete diabetes benchmark, the hard-constraint calibration check, and the observation-scale/Moreau sensitivity study. It is currently accessible in the above repository. 

# Statements and declarations 

Competing interests. The author declares no competing interests. 

Funding. The author received no specific funding for this work. 

Supplementary information. A separate supplementary manuscript contains additional derivations, full simulation grids, numerical diagnostics and the complete diabetes benchmark table. 31 References 

Amir Beck and Marc Teboulle. A Fast Iterative Shrinkage-Thresholding Algorithm for Linear Inverse Problems. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences , 2(1):183–202, 2009. 10.1137/080716542. Howard D. Bondell and Brian J. Reich. Consistent High-Dimensional Bayesian Variable Selection via Penalized Credible Regions. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 107(500): 1610–1624, 2012. 10.1080/01621459.2012.716344. Valentin De Bortoli, Alain Durmus, Marcelo Pereyra, and Ana Fernandez Vidal. Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Regularization Parameters in High-Dimensional Inverse Problems: An Empirical Bayesian Approach. Part II: Theoretical Analysis. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences , 13(4):1990–2028, 2020. 10.1137/20M1339842. Leo L Duan. Revisiting Bayesian Variable Selection via Optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.21009 , 2026. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2604.21009. Alain Durmus, Éric Moulines, and Marcelo Pereyra. Efficient Bayesian Computation by Proximal Markov Chain Monte Carlo: When Langevin Meets Moreau. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences , 11(1):473–506, 2018. 10.1137/16M1108340. Bradley Efron, Trevor Hastie, Iain Johnstone, and Robert Tibshirani. Least Angle Regression. The Annals of Statistics , 32(2):407–499, 2004. 10.1214/009053604000000067. Ana Fernandez Vidal, Valentin De Bortoli, Marcelo Pereyra, and Alain Durmus. Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Regularization Parameters in High-Dimensional Inverse Problems: An Empirical Bayesian Approach. Part I: Methodology and Experiments. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences , 13(4):1945–1989, 2020. 10.1137/20M1339829. P. Richard Hahn and Carlos M. Carvalho. Decoupling Shrinkage and Selection in Bayesian Linear Models: A Posterior Summary Perspective. Journal of the American Statistical Association ,110(509):435–448, 2015. 10.1080/01621459.2014.993077. Trevor Park and George Casella. The Bayesian Lasso. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 103(482):681–686, 2008. 10.1198/016214508000000337. Marcelo Pereyra. Proximal Markov Chain Monte Carlo Algorithms. Statistics and Computing , 26: 745–760, 2016. 10.1007/s11222-015-9567-4. Marcelo Pereyra, Luis Vargas Mieles, and Konstantinos C Zygalakis. Accelerating proximal Markov chain Monte Carlo by using an explicit stabilized method. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences ,32 13(2):905–935, 2020. 10.1137/19M1283719. Juho Piironen, Markus Paasiniemi, and Aki Vehtari. Projective Inference in High-Dimensional Problems: Prediction and Feature Selection. Electronic Journal of Statistics , 14(1):2155–2197, 2020. 10.1214/20-EJS1711. Dimitrios Roxanas. Low-Turnover Rebalancing for Sparse Index Tracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.22109v2 , 2025. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2512.22109. Tingni Sun and Cun-Hui Zhang. Scaled Sparse Linear Regression. Biometrika , 99(4):879–898, 2012. 10.1093/biomet/ass043. Robert Tibshirani. Regression Shrinkage and Selection via the Lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) , 58(1):267–288, 1996. 10.1111/j.2517-6161.1996.tb02080.x. Maoran Xu and Leo L Duan. Bayesian inference with the l1-ball prior: solving combinatorial problems with exact zeros. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , 85(5):1538–1560, 2023. 10.1093/jrsssb/qkad076. Maoran Xu, Hua Zhou, Yujie Hu, and Leo L Duan. Bayesian inference using the proximal mapping: Uncertainty quantification under varying dimensionality. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 119(547):1847–1858, 2024. 10.1080/01621459.2023.2220170. Xinkai Zhou, Qiang Heng, Eric C. Chi, and Hua Zhou. Proximal MCMC for Bayesian Inference of Constrained and Regularized Estimation. The American Statistician , 78(4):379–390, 2024. 10.1080/00031305.2024.2308821. 33