Title: A Causal Framework for Mitigating Data Shifts in Healthcare

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.13595v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Mar 2026 00:31:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# A Causal Framework for Mitigating Data Shifts in Healthcare 

Kurt Butler 1,2 kbutler2@ed.ac.uk 

Stephanie Riley 1,3 stephanie.riley-3@manchester.ac.uk 

Damian Machlanski 1,2 d.machlanski@ed.ac.uk 

Edward Moroshko 2 emoroshk@ed.ac.uk 

Panagiotis Dimitrakopoulos 1,2 pdimitra@ed.ac.uk 

Thomas Melistas 2,4,5 melistas.th@gmail.com 

Akchunya Chanchal 1,6 akchunya.chanchal@kcl.ac.uk 

Konstantinos Vilouras 2 konstantinos.vilouras@ed.ac.uk 

Zhihua Liu 1,2 zliu7@ed.ac.uk 

Steven McDonagh 1,2 s.mcdonagh@ed.ac.uk 

Hana Chockler 1,6 hana.chockler@kcl.ac.uk 

Ben Glocker 1,7 b.glocker@imperial.ac.uk 

Niccolò Tempini 1,8 N.Tempini@exeter.ac.uk 

Matthew Sperrin 1,3 matthew.sperrin@manchester.ac.uk 

Sotirios A. Tsaftaris 1,2 S.Tsaftaris@ed.ac.uk 

Ricardo Silva 1,9 ricardo.silva@ucl.ac.uk 

> 1

Causality in Healthcare AI Hub (CHAI), UK 

> 2

The University of Edinburgh, UK; 3University of Manchester, UK 

> 4

Athena Research Center, Greece; 5NKU Athens, Greece 

> 6

King’s College London, UK; 7Imperial College London, UK 

> 8

University of Exeter, UK; 9University College London, UK 

## Abstract 

Developing predictive models that perform reliably across diverse patient populations and heterogeneous environments is a core aim of medical research. However, generalization is only possible if the learned model is robust to statistical differences between data used for training and data seen at the time and place of deployment. Domain generalization meth-ods provide strategies to address data shifts, but each method comes with its own set of assumptions and trade-offs. To apply these methods in healthcare, we must understand how domain shifts arise, what assumptions we prefer to make, and what our design constraints are. This article proposes a causal framework for the design of predictive models to improve generalization. Causality provides a powerful language to characterize and understand di-verse domain shifts, regardless of data modality. This allows us to pinpoint why models fail to generalize, leading to more principled strategies to prepare for and adapt to shifts. We recommend general mitigation strategies, discussing trade-offs and highlighting existing work. Our causality-based perspective offers a critical foundation for developing robust, interpretable, and clinically relevant AI solutions in healthcare, paving the way for reliable real-world deployment. 

## 1 Main 

Consider a hypothetical group of researchers that deploy a sepsis prediction model. At the hospital where it was developed, the model has impressive accuracy, passes various diagnostic tests and performs well during cross-validation. At a different hospital, later investigators found that the model was no longer accurate, and its predictions differed significantly from what doctors expected. It was observed that the distributions of the input data differed between institutions. Standard corrections like importance weighting 1

> arXiv:2603.13595v1 [cs.LG] 13 Mar 2026

are attempted to resolve the issue, but performance does not significantly improve. What went wrong? Later investigators notice that the two hospitals use different monitoring equipment, meaning that the same patient will produce different data depending on the device used. When the measurement process changes, the relationship between vital signs and sepsis is not preserved across sites. The correct solution was measurement calibration, not importance weighting. This example highlights a general problem that statistical descriptions of data shift can be ambiguous about their causal origin. In such cases, we must “map out" the system to identify solutions, and a purely statistical map will not do. To describe the processes that generate data, and to describe how those processes are affected by interventions, measurement recalibrations, and other exogenous influences, we require a causal map. Although our example is fictional, Machine Learning (ML) models are increasingly being widely deployed in real life. Specific examples include the QRISK model for the incidence of cardiovascular disease (Hippisley-Cox et al., 2017), the PREDICT model for breast cancer survival (Wishart et al., 2010), and the automated retinal disease assessment (ARDA) for diabetic retinopathy (Brant et al., 2025). There is already a huge number of new healthcare and clinical prediction models that are proposed every year (Arshi et al., 2025). Instead of contributing to the ever-growing avalanche of new models, we advocate for the development of models that are robust, reusable and that can be shared across institutions and applied in different settings (Van Calster et al., 2025). However, variations in how data are generated affect the statistical relationships that are used in prediction. Variations in disease prevalence across population strata can lead to misdiagnoses (Leeflang et al., 2009; Manrai et al., 2016). Variations in equipment, staffing, or protocols across time may result in noisy, missing, or otherwise mismatched data (Van Calster et al., 2023). Generally, variations may occur due to regional differences (Hwang et al., 2026) and the passage of time (Vela et al., 2022). Whether these variations matter is context dependent, and it may be unclear a priori as to what types of variations a model will be sensitive to. Models may be naturally robust to certain variations, but in other cases ignorance to such effects will lead to suboptimal prediction in new settings. These variations, which we call data shifts, are variously referred to as data set shifts (Subbaswamy and Saria, 2018), domain shifts (Zhang et al., 2021), or distribution shifts (Fang et al., 2020), across medicine, computer science and statistics, with occasional minor differences in meaning. It can be challenging to navigate this fragmented research landscape, and deciding how one should move from problem identification to technical solutions remains unclear. Every problem is unique in that the prediction target, the variables available to be used in prediction making, and the foreseeable data shifts may all vary across problems. Even in clinical research, existing reporting guidelines like TRIPOD+AI request that investigators report how predictors are defined and chosen, but the underlying logic as to why those predictors are chosen is left open-ended for the investigators (Collins et al., 2024). Establishing a clear, structured framework for this transition is essential to ensuring that the resulting predictive models are fair, transparent, and interpretable for doctors, engineers, administrators and the public. In this paper, we propose causality as a unifying framework to address data shift problems and to guide the design of robust models. Inspired by recent works in causality (Jalaldoust et al., 2024; Jones et al., 2024; Castro et al., 2020), health research (Subbaswamy and Saria, 2020; Subasri et al., 2025; Hickey et al., 2013; Sperrin et al., 2022) and ML (Salaudeen et al., 2025; Richens and Everitt, 2024), we argue that causality is an essential tool for the design of predictors that can generalize well. Our contributions are as follows: 1. We propose a conceptual framework for the design of predictive models intended for uses that involve data shifts. We advocate for a case-by-case approach to designing predictors, acknowledging that problem-specific conditions and requirements often lead to design preferences. 2. We explore how causal knowledge can allow us to determine different classes of problems that require different solutions, and we explore one version of this approach using augmented causal graphs. 3. We identify key pieces of information that one should extract from a problem description to determine the problem class that will shed light on applicable solutions. Although healthcare and clinical research serve as rich sources of inspiration for our framework, our ideas are broadly applicable to data shift problems in other disciplines. 22 Sources of Variation in Healthcare and Medicine 

Before discussing our framework, it is useful to have an intuition for how data shifts arise. For the purposes of this work, we consider data sets that describe populations of patients interacting with healthcare systems, potentially over a period of time. From a healthcare perspective, the ways in which moving from one context to another can affect data are innumerable. Even within the same geographical region, health institutions may differ radically in staffing, instrumentation and in how they collect data (Subasri et al., 2025). Data shifts also can occur due to the passage of time, as seasonal changes, epidemics, policy changes, and general changes in societal behaviour can also affect the observed data sets. Some sources of data shifts may be straightforward to locate, such as the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, but other shifts may have unobservable, unknown or undocumented origins. To facilitate thinking about data shifts from the health perspective, we propose three broad categories. Our goal in this section is to group shifts by their source of variation. This differs from other categorizations, which often group shifts by their mathematical properties (Zhou et al., 2022). These categories are not intended to be exhaustive or mutually exclusive. Rather, they serve as a heuristic to guide the process of identifying sources of variation in health domains, which is an important part of our problem. 

Population-level shifts This category covers fundamental changes in the underlying population of pa-tients. These include demographic shifts, which encompass changes in the distribution of age, sex, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, deprivation, or other factors. These also include case-mix shifts, where disease preva-lence, severity, duration or the presence of comorbidities may vary. This category can also account for referral and access biases, where strata-dependent access to health institutions affects which patients are likely to appear in data sets. Examples of population-level shifts are common in the literature. Demographic changes between training and deployment can exacerbate existing health inequities by leading to less accurate diagnoses or estimates of risk for people who already struggle to access the necessary care (Ganapathi et al., 2022; Jones et al., 2024). Furthermore, a prediction model developed using hospital admission data may not generalise well to primary care. Patients admitted to hospital are typically more unwell or may have already undergone prior clinical filtering, such as a general practitioner (GP) referral. A model developed in hospital settings may therefore be miscalibrated when applied in primary care, where patients tend to be earlier in the disease course (Knottnerus, 2002). 

Exposure, selection and observation-level shifts Apart from changes in the patient population itself, some shifts occur in the processes by which institutions interact with, treat, and record data from the population. This category concerns the process of recording data and its contingencies on the resources, practices, protocols and staffing of the hospitals in which data is collected. Observation-level shifts concern changes in the way in which data is collected. For instance, a model may be trained on objectively measured Body Mass Index (BMI) data recorded in a clinical setting, yet is deployed in a setting where only less-accurate, self-reported BMI is available (Gosse, 2014). Subjective and score-based tests are also vulnerable. The Glasgow coma scale (GCS) is a subjective measure of consciousness, and GCS scores for the same patient can vary depending on who performs the observation (McLernon, 2014). In instrument-based analyses like radiology or spectroscopy, differences in hardware calibration can produce unique artifacts and biases that do not generalize (Bratchenko and Bratchenko, 2025; Glocker et al., 2019). Even software updates can periodically induce data shifts that affect the performance of computerized medical imaging systems (Roschewitz et al., 2023). Ignoring shifts of this type risks mistaking artifacts of the observation process as spurious indicators of change in patients’ health. Exposure-level shifts, in contrast, reflect variations in how different hospitals prioritize treatment and admis-sion. In clinical research, differences in cohort study design can lead to differences in observed outcomes (Pye et al., 2018). A classic example from oncology is the “Will Rogers” phenomenon, where the introduction of more-sensitive diagnostic tools appears to trigger a shift in the data, where patients move between disease stages without any actual change in their health or treatment (Feinstein et al., 1985). 3Finally, in most healthcare and clinical research there is a risk of selection bias , where data shifts occur because we implicitly only record data from a subset of the population. Selection biases go under various names in practice, such as healthy user bias (where individuals with proactive health-seeking behaviors are systematically overrepresented) or access bias (where systemic or strata-dependent barriers influence which patients appear in the data). The issue of selection bias is a general and important one, and the connections to causality have been explored in recent work (Mathur and Shpitser, 2025). 

Definition-level shifts We distinguish a third category to account for shifts in the semantics of health. While population shifts concern the subjects and observation/exposure shifts concern the measurement process, definition-level shifts involve fundamental changes in how clinical states are quantified, codified, and understood. Definition-level shifts are not due to a change in data quality, but due to a more fundamental shift in what the data means. Such shifts can happen when updates to institutional procedures, national guidelines or international standards occur, potentially rendering statistical relationships in historical data obsolete (Sahiner et al., 2023; Cohen et al., 2024). Shifts of this level may also occur across linguistic divides, particularly for language models. For example, models trained on Western medical data fail to adapt to local dialects or cultural descriptions of symptoms in low and middle income countries (Ong et al., 2026). In the simplest case, clinical definitions may periodically change or evolve. The redefinition of clinical criteria for sepsis, from Sepsis-2 to Sepsis-3, fundamentally altered the labeled population by moving from inflammatory to organ-dysfunction markers (Singer et al., 2016). In the case of emerging diseases, existing definitions might not be sufficient to record them. COVID-19 did not have an assigned ICD-10 diagnosis code until April 2020, with earlier presentations of the disease being recorded as pneumonia or acute respiratory distress syndrome (Kadri et al., 2020). Without accounting for these shifts, models risk becoming “time-locked” to outdated clinical standards. 

## 3 Understanding How Shifts Arise in Data 

Data shifts arise because the real life processes which generate data are affected by environment-specific conditions or by external disruptions. As we discussed earlier, an environment might refer to a particular hospital, a particular time, a particular study, or potentially even an intersection of these. Sometimes the data used for training is chosen out of convenience or accessibility, rather than being perfectly matched to where the predictive model is eventually deployed (Sperrin et al., 2022). The problem is not a lack of data either, because even models trained on large datasets can be susceptible to data shifts as long as the deployment environment differs from the training environment. To make sense of this, it helps to use a graphical notation to describe how data shifts interact with systems of variables. We employ the augmented causal graph (ACG) notation, which we provide a primer for in Box 1. 

3.1 A primer on augmented causal graph notation 

Causal modeling allows us to answer questions about how data was generated. Compared to associational models, which tend to represent relationships between variables in terms of probabilities, causal models make explicit the directional dependencies between variables according to the order of events that generate their values. The traditional way to represent such ordered dependencies is using causal graphs (Pearl, 2009). For prediction problems, we may write out nodes corresponding to each variable of interest, represented below by circles. Sometimes we may be aware of (or speculate the existence of) latent variables which we cannot directly observe. We include latent variables in the graph, perhaps denoting them with an unshaded circle or a dashed outline. Finally, for the purposes of prediction problems, one of the observed variables should be designated as the prediction target , colored orange. 4Observed variables 

> Shift variables
> Prediction target
> Latent variables

Edges in the causal graph express direct dependencies between variables. That is, if there is an edge A → B

between two variables A and B, then this means that forcing A to different values should affect the likelihood of B, with all other factors held constant. Importantly, the absence of edges in the graph are used to express 

conditional independence , where B is independent of its non-descendants conditioned on its parents. For example, if B ← A → C, then B is independent of C when conditioned on their common cause A, denoted 

B ⊥⊥ C|A. Conversely, causal graphs also inform us of collider bias , where conditioning on a common descendant of two variables induces a correlation, X ⊥⊥/ Y |Z, that does not exist normally, X ⊥⊥ Y , (Pearl, 2009). Using circles and edges as above, we can describe how variables connect and influence each other in a causal manner. However, a data shift may interrupt such a causal system, removing some dependencies or modifying others. We adopt an extension of the standard causal graphs (Dawid, 2021). Denoted using a square, shift variables are used to index various environments (also called settings, domains, regimes, or contexts in other literature). An environment is a state of the data-generating process, which we assign a number to without placing a probability distribution over said numbers. For example, it could be useful to annotate datasets that were recorded pre- and post-COVID-19 with different labels, such as 1 or 2, but it is not generally useful to model a probability distribution for these labels. Edges from a shift variable to another variable express a sensitivity to the change of setting. If there is an edge S → C, where S is a shift variable, then this expresses that the probability distribution pS (C) can vary as a function of the value of 

S. To make this more concrete, consider the following graph. Lung 

> cancer
> Screening
> policy
> Smoking
> Age,
> Occupation,
> Socio -economic status
> Significant
> weight loss

In the graph above, we are interested in predicting the diagnosis of lung cancer. It is well-established that smoking causes increased risk of lung cancer, but the exact nature of that relationship is confounded by age, occupational hazards, and socio-economic status. Patients of lung cancer also typically experience significant weight loss. At present, people aged 55 – 74 who have ever smoked are screened for lung cancer. Otherwise, patients are only tested for lung cancer if they present to their GP with symptoms. Consider the screening criteria was widened to include both a wider range of ages and people who have never smoked. This could then cause some patients to be diagnosed sooner and at early stages of the disease. As such patients may not be as sick and the average rate of weight loss changes. In this case we may see a data shift in the weight loss variable. In graphical notation, this means there is a single edge from the screening policy to significant weight loss. 

3.2 Classical domain generalization 

In machine learning, much of the work on handling data shifts falls under the literature on Domain General-ization (DG). Works in this area follow the language of supervised learning, framing the data shift problem in terms of covariates X (inputs to the predictive model) and target Y (the output variable). From this formulation, four basic shift types emerge, each corresponding to changes in different components of the joint 5“Causal” shift  

> “Anti -causal” shift
> Predictive
> model
> Input variable Output variable
> Covariate shift occurs when the inputs to
> the predictive model are affected by a shift.

Classical description 

Causal descriptions 

> Shift occurs in a
> cause of the
> target, so both
> variables may be
> affected.
> Shift occurs in an
> outcome of the
> target, so only one
> of the variables is
> affected.
> Something else
> Perhaps a shift
> occurred in a
> latent variable
> that affected both
> observed
> variables.

Figure 1: An illustration of how classical domain generalization differs from the causal theory of domain generalization. In this example, we show that even in a simple setting, a covariate shift could arise from several distinct causal scenarios. distribution P (X, Y ) (Schölkopf et al., 2012). It is common in this literature to describe probability distri-butions as being either unstable (significantly altered by the shift) or stable (also called invariant, meaning the effect of the shift is negligible). Under covariate shift, the distribution of inputs P (X) changes while the conditional P (Y |X) remains stable. For example, a model trained on younger patients encountering an older population at deployment. Concept shift describes the opposite situation where P (X) stays constant but P (Y |X) evolves, e.g., revised treatment protocols can change the mapping from patient features to outcomes. The alternative factorization yields two additional types. Firstly, label shift occurs when outcome prevalence P (Y ) changes but how outcomes manifest in features P (X|Y ) remains stable, e.g., when disease rates differ across hospitals but symptoms present identically. Secondly, anti-causal features shift is the converse: P (Y ) is preserved but P (X|Y ) varies, e.g., when different imaging equipment produces different representations of the same underlying pathology. This taxonomy, while useful, is agnostic to causal structure. It groups all inputs as “covariates" without distinguishing whether X causes Y , is caused by Y , or relates to Y only through confounding. We visualize this distinction in Fig. 1. A shift in P (Y |X) could arise because the causal mechanism changed, because a latent confounder distribution shifted, or because selection bias distorts the observed relationship, each producing the same statistical signature but requiring different solutions. Causal reasoning resolves this ambiguity by modeling the data-generating process itself, allowing us to anticipate which relationships will remain stable and diagnose the source of observed shifts. Even in the classical view, it is not necessary that every domain shift problem falls neatly into one of these four types. Joint shifts represent the most complex and realistic category of distribution shifts, where multiple components of P (X, Y ) change simultaneously. Unlike the “pure” shift types described above, joint shifts involve combinations of shifts that can create intricate patterns of model degradation that are difficult to diagnose and address with single-strategy approaches. For example, a shift can involve both a change in 

P (X) and in P (Y |X), creating compound effects that cannot be addressed by adaptation strategies designed for either covariate shift or concept shift alone. Indeed, joint shifts are more common than not in healthcare, making real-world deployment uniquely challenging and favoring model design around stable predictors. 6Confounder shifts represent a particularly important subtype of joint shifts (Reddy et al., 2026) in healthcare. These occur when latent variables U that influence both X and Y change the distribution. Even when the causal mechanisms P (X|U ) and P (Y |X, U ) remain constant, a change in P (U ) propagates through the causal graph to simultaneously affect P (X), P (Y ) and P (Y |X).To address shifts in practice, there are many classes of methods within the DG literature. Test-time or online adaptation methods allow the systems to perform automated adjustments to self-correct during deployment (Wang et al., 2021; 2022). When retraining models during deployment is possible, models can be designed to actively adapt to the new environment as new data is received. Domain adaptation is a similar concept where unlabeled deployment-environment data is used to improve the original training, but the model is not updated during later deployment (Gong et al., 2012; Kulis et al., 2011; Ganin and Lempitsky, 2015). These approaches are not always feasible due to privacy regulations such as the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (Tian et al., 2023), since a retrained model might memorize personal information (Hartley et al., 2023). Other challenges are that retraining consumes power, memory and time that might not be available during deployment. Invariant representation learning methods attempt to generalize by mining for patterns that generalize across multiple environments, either using multiple datasets or expert knowledge (Arjovsky et al., 2020; Muandet et al., 2013). Meta learning methods sit between these extremes, aiming to design models that will be quick to adapt to new environments by leveraging several environments seen during training (Hospedales et al., 2021). 

3.3 What causality can tell us about shifts 

Where shifts enter the causal graph matters. If a shift affects how a symptom is produced by a disease, then that symptom cannot be used to detect the presence of said disease. In contrast, if the shift occurs only in the prevalence of this disease, then predictions about the symptoms can still be made using the old model, up to some loss of statistical efficiency. In causal language, these two prediction tasks are different. One is prediction in the “causal” direction (predicting an outcome from its causes) and one is prediction in the “anti-causal” direction (predicting an outcome from its symptoms or downstream effects). 1

In our graphical notation, these correspond to two separate cases, shown in Fig. 2. The emphasis here is not that shifts fall neatly into distinct categories. In real world systems, there might be multiple shifts, or a single shift might affect both causes and effects of a disease. These cases are more complex than the basic ones outlined above. However, all of these examples underline the fact that causality matters for DG, and causal reasoning helps us consider how these shifts ultimately affect a predictive model. If we expect a model to generalize under a sufficiently large set of shifts, then causal reasoning becomes a necessity for robust generalization (Richens and Everitt, 2024). A principal advantage of causal reasoning in this setting is that it permits us to be proactive in our model design (Subbaswamy and Saria, 2018). This allows us to reason about the effects of data shifts before we observe them. But it comes at the price of specifying the details about the anticipated shifts, which will likely come from domain knowledge. This is not necessarily a downside as this strategy gives domain experts an opportunity to leverage their knowledge to build bespoke models tailored specifically to the data they have. The exact form in which knowledge should be encoded to help with building models can vary, but we illustrate several examples in Fig. 2. In the causality literature, several methods for the data shift problem have been proposed (Pearl and Barein-boim, 2011; Zhang et al., 2015; Peters et al., 2016; Magliacane et al., 2018; Subbaswamy and Saria, 2018; Arjovsky et al., 2020; Kaur et al., 2022; Subbaswamy et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Tsai et al., 2024; Jalal-doust et al., 2024). The method of invariant causal prediction attempts to achieve generalization by learning causal mechanisms that are unaffected by data shifts (Peters et al., 2016), barring interventions that affect the target itself. Data augmentation methods are used when certain features might be useful for prediction, but are known to be not universally applicable (e.g., detecting polar bears by looking for snowy images). Such methods are especially useful in computer vision, where tools such as image segmentation and inpaint-ing give clear strategies for data augmentation (Ouyang et al., 2022; Duan et al., 2024). Counterfactual data augmentation is a sub-approach that specifically uses a causal model to formulate how to edit images 

> 1Note this can only be done for diagnostic, not prognostic, models.

7Augmented causal graphs  Causal effects 

Functional description 

Handling unobserved variables 

Structural assumptions about shifts can lead 

to targeted mitigation strategies. 

> Covariates
> Shift
> variables
> Target

Causal shift 

> Covariates
> Shift
> variables
> Target

Anti -causal shift 

Proxies for 

unobserved 

Confounders 

Adjustment sets 

Where shifts that occur in the graph can 

affect our strategy. 

Shift in average 

Mitigate by 

dereferencing 

Change in SNR 

Mitigate by 

denoising 

Assumptions about the causal mechanisms 

(structure) enable counterfactual reasoning 

and isolation of data shifts 

Counterfactual 

reasoning 

Use counterfactual 

estimation  to debias 

Collider bias 

Use graphs to detect 

when  correlations are 

induced by feature 

selection. Figure 2: An illustration of various ways in which causal descriptions enhance our understanding of data shifts and inform our strategies to address them. Causal descriptions, either as graphs or descriptions as a data-generation process, are useful to mitigate data shifts. As we later show in Fig. 3, formulating causal descriptions is a crucial part of our framework. 8(Melistas et al., 2024). Other methods take a strongly analytic approach, analyzing the transportability of causal relationships across environments using detailed graphical models (Jalaldoust et al., 2024). While useful when the model is right, we do not take the stance that this is the only way to proceed. Causal graphs in real systems are often misspecified or incomplete, and data shifts need not behave exactly as our simple mathematical descriptions. However, as we observe in the case of "causal" and "anti-causal" shifts, even basic graphical information can be useful to inform strategies for generalization. 

3.4 Other forms of causal information 

The graphical descriptions afforded to us by ACGs allow us to visualize where shifts occur and what their effects might be, but additional information, when available, can greatly benefit solving the problem. For example, the strength of a data shift often matters. If a data shift is not very strong, then many distinct deployment strategies may work well, because ultimately there was not much adaptation required from the model. This property has been demonstrated empirically and theoretically in simple models (Salaudeen et al., 2025). Also, the mathematical or functional form of the shift is useful to know. For example in electroencephalography, a form of data shift frequently occurs due to a wandering reference voltage (Yao et al., 2019). However, because the data shift is assumed to take on the form of a localized additive bias, which affects all observations within nearby brain regions similarly, techniques such as bipolar or common average montages are used during preprocessing to negate the effects of the data shift (Acharya and Acharya, 2019). In general, there is no universal algorithm that can address data shifts, but when extra information is available, it can lead to specialized solutions for data shifts as well. Because every problem may differ in the form that shifts take, the data that is available, and other environment-specific idiosyncrasies, the design of robust predictive models in practice is an open-ended pursuit. 

## 4 Mapping Problems to Solutions 

Given a prediction problem, our goal is to clarify the process of thinking carefully and arriving at a solution. By reasoning causally throughout this process, we can better anticipate how the system will behave when deployed, and ultimately when it is exposed to data shifts. Depending on the situation, there might be many adequate solutions, or there may be none. In the case that there are many solutions, preferences might only emerge after further contemplation, and these preferences could also be context dependent. Our goal is not to provide a formal algorithm to select a given solution for dealing with data shifts, but to produce a general framework for how these solutions are proposed, evaluated for feasibility, and compared. We visualize the roadmap for our framework in Fig. 3. We break down the process into four stages: Problem Conceptualization, Causal Description, Feasibility checks, and Deployment Strategies. 

I. Problem Conceptualization Our focus so far has been on predictive modeling with machine learning models, but often in healthcare and medicine, predictive modeling is a means to an end. Predictive models may be used to inform decision making, anticipate negative events, and evaluate multiple possible interven-tions, but the exact way that these models are designed and used is flexible. Some goals, such as forecasting patient trajectories, can be naturally formulated as predictive tasks. Other problems may be more indirectly connected to predictive tasks, and so there is flexibility in how the predictive model may be used in problem solving. The goal then is to think through how prediction is used, and what the likely sources of variation are that may affect the results, with both clinical and engineering expertise in the conversation. During this stage, one must pick their prediction target, and then specify what inputs will be used to make predictions from available data repository. Is any important variable missing that we should collect? Additionally, one must consider what environments the predictive model is intended to be making predictions in. 

II. Causal Description After specifying a predictive task, the next step is to describe the problem mathematically. The coarsest description that one can give is to split variables into covariates and targets. 9II. Causal Description I. Problem Conceptualization 

## IV. Deployment Strategies 

## III. Feasibility Analysis 

Observed variables 

Shift variables 

Prediction target 

Latent variables 

Encode 

knowledge 

mathematically 

Operational constraints :

Are models allowed to 

adapt during testing? Are 

there privacy 

constraints? 

Computational constraints :

Is there sufficient data to 

learn the model? Are there 

constraints on speed, 

compute, memory, power 

or accuracy? 

Identify stable/unstable 

relationships 

Proceed with 

all available 

knowledge 

Is it possible to  isolate  or 

control for the effects of 

shifts using adjustments 

or proxies?  Problem is 

feasible 

Problem is infeasible, given 

current description 

What is the target of prediction? 

What data is available? 

What other variables should be defined? 

What sources of variation are expected 

when the system is deployed? 

Structural Assumptions : Are there explicit 

equations or models that describe how variables 

are generated or inter -relate? 

E.g., blood pressure depends on dosage linearly 

Functional Assumptions : Are there assumptions 

that we can make about how a shift affects the 

distribution of a variable? 

E.g., a change in noise variance 

Augmented 

Causal Graphs 

Data  preprocessing : Are 

there specific ways to 

filter data to remove the 

influence of shifts? 

Stable feature 

selection 

Invariant Risk 

Minimization 

Causally Robust 

Optimization 

Counterfactual 

image generation 

Domain adaptation 

algorithms 

Proxy methods for 

latent variables 

> Potentially
> unstable
> variables
> Stable
> variables

Figure 3: A roadmap of our framework for developing predictive models. We define four stages: I. Problem conceptualization, II. Causal description, III. Feasibility analysis, and IV. Deployment strategies. While the stages can be followed sequentially, model design is iterative and may require revisiting earlier stages as we evaluate the feasibility of the model. 10 As discussed in previous sections and Fig. 1, there are several reasons that more detail in the problem formulation, specifically causal details, can improve the deployment of predictive models. Depending on the problem, more or fewer assumptions about the model may be appropriate. Sometimes, we might only have access to a (hypothesized) augmented causal graph, but even this basic information is useful, as shown in Fig. 2. When available, additional information can be of further use. Assuming specific equations, functional forms or probability distributions are useful to improve inference, when the assumptions are appropriate. Information about the nature of a shift, or the strength of a shift, even if unknown, can be useful to devise strategies to mitigate their negative effects. 

III. Feasibility Analysis Given a causal description of the system, one can then check their model for feasibility. In general, there are many criteria that could be used to evaluate a model’s utility, even at a high level. Constraints on the speed, model type, computer memory, compute, number of parameters, accuracy, false positive or negative rate, power consumption, interpretability, user privacy or data availability all matter in determining whether a given predictive model can be used. If the required infrastructure, support, or resources needed for a long-term or sophisticated solution are not available, then the preferences for solutions will differ from institutions that have a larger budget and more investment in the system. Deciding on the best solution is an iterative process, requiring a revision of the modeling assumptions and desiderata across multiple rounds. As a first step, we need to check that there are enough observed variables to make predictions. Variables for which we only have noisy or proxy observations may not be usable for prediction. Also, it is often useful to identify the existence of stable variables for prediction, which are those unaffected by data shifts. Empirical studies in benchmarking predictive models suggest that unstable relationships are not necessarily useless for prediction (Salaudeen et al.), but their predictive utility cannot be verified a priori. Again, this relates to the idea that a data shift may also bias a prediction. Sometimes this bias is not strong enough to abandon a given predictive model for a different one that might need to make stronger assumptions about the nature of possible shifts. Still, stable relationships are useful to generate a baseline for predictive modeling, providing a lower bound on performance during deployment. Additionally, there are two categories of solutions that we can distinguish, adaptive and non-adaptive. For adaptive solutions, the AI model is permitted to use data after deployment to adapt itself to the new environment. Broadly, this includes paradigms like adaptive filtering (Rupp et al., 2016) and continual learning (Liu, 2020), and the procedure of adaptation could involve changing the entire model’s parameters (as seen in methods such as Elastic Weight Consolidation (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017)) or merely adapting a few specific parameters of the system. Non-adaptive solutions are those that do not receive updates while deployed. Not adapting to a new user can be beneficial to avoid costs in speed and compute related to processing new data, and also pose no privacy risk for new users. 

IV. Deployment Strategies Once the desiderata for the problem are known, and details about our modeling assumptions and available data are given, one can invoke various methods to design a system that deploys well. As discussed in earlier, there are many strategies for doing this. Methods based on feature selection (Li et al., 2022) or data augmentation (Volpi et al., 2018; Von Kügelgen et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2023) can be used to exclude unstable features from the model, or to adjust for imbalances in the training data, respectively. When multiple environments are available in the training data, the principle of Invariant Risk Minimization seeks to learn a single predictor for all observed training environments (Arjovsky et al., 2020). Alternatively, one may leverage causal and statistical knowledge to attempt to optimally transport from one environment to a specific target environment (Jalaldoust et al., 2024; Blanchet et al., 2025; Sagawa* et al., 2020). The ultimate preference depends both on the feasibility requirements identified in Stage III and the causal assumptions and details expressed in Stage II. In practice, multiple candidate solutions may be of interest. In such case, approaches of ensembles or cross validation are useful to produce a single prediction from a set of many. Additionally, during validation, multiple candidate solutions may be compared and evaluated empirically, producing information about their actual performance and costs that are not available in a purely theoretical analysis. 11 4.1 Limitations of this Framework 

A core assumption of this framework is that data shifts admit mathematical descriptions using causal graphs and other mathematical structures. In domains like epidemiology, the process of creating graphs is entirely routine to some researchers (Hossain, 2025). In other cases (Ong et al., 2026), it might be unclear how shifts can be monitored, detected or even hypothesized. For shifts in data distributions, annotation practices, or technical infrastructure that can be formally char-acterized, causal AI methods offer rigorous frameworks for modeling and mitigation. While causal graphs provide valuable tools for understanding certain types of shifts, the performance of AI systems in healthcare emerges from complex socio-technical systems that extend beyond what can be captured in formal models. Shifts occurring at organizational (clinical protocols, workflow configurations), institutional (policy targets, resource allocation mechanisms), and socio-cultural levels (professional norms, epistemic values) could be equally consequential for system performance. These factors operate through mechanisms that might resist formal mathematical representation. Recognizing these as legitimate sources of shift does not diminish the superior value of causal modeling. This suggests that causal AI modeling, requiring input from experts and the use of local knowledge and domain knowledge, might need to work hand in hand with an analysis of the institutional arrangements, professional capabilities, and organizational processes necessary for well-aligned local deployment. What cannot be formally modeled might still be systematically addressed if sizable shifts that are difficult to characterize are present. This is the concern of other work we are carrying out in parallel (Tempini and Lowe, 2025) and is not a compromise, but a recognition that system performance in heterogeneous healthcare contexts depends on factors operating across multiple scales and modalities. 

## 5 Case Studies 

In this section, we consider three instances of our framework being applied to problems that appear in the healthcare literature. 

5.1 Case study on skin lesion classification with computer vision 

Consider a predictive model for melanoma detection from skin lesion images. Deep learning models achieve remarkable accuracy in this task (Esteva et al., 2017), but often fail to generalize across clinical sites due to differences in protocols, e.g., marking practices (Winkler et al., 2019; Chamarthi et al., 2024). This degradation commonly arises when models rely on spurious correlations between image artifacts (such as rulers or clinical markings) and disease labels, rather than learning clinically meaningful features of the lesion itself (Bissoto et al., 2019; 2020). While these correlations can be highly predictive in the training dataset, they might not hold in other data distributions. Below, we show how our causal framework proactively addresses such data shifts.                                      

> 1. (Problem Conceptualization) We observe images of skin lesions X, from which we make predictions for the malignancy of the lesion, provided by the biopsy result Y. The underlying disease state U, which is unobserved, manifests through the skin appearance S. During examination, clinicians may add markings M
> to highlight areas that seem suspicious or warrant closer attention, which become part of the captured image. To model variation across clinical environments, we introduce an environment variable Drepresenting the institution or the treating physician, reflecting differences in marking conventions (some dermatologists may mark suspicious areas more moderately than others) and acquisition practices. Models are trained on data from one or more sites that follow specific practices, and must generalize to new sites where these conventions may differ. 2. (Causal Description) Now, we must map out all the causal pathways in our system. The disease state
> Udetermines skin appearance S, which is captured in the image: U→S→X.Clinicians observe the skin appearance Sand, based on this observation, decide which areas to mark: S→M. However, marking conventions also depend on the doctor’s individual practice patterns or institutional protocols: D→M.These markings then appear in the final image: M→X. As illustrated below, Dmay also be correlated

12 with Y due to differences in referral or biopsy practices, creating a shortcut that models can exploit. Amodel may therefore learn to associate markings with malignancy rather than relying on lesion appearance, leading to performance degradation when marking conventions change (Castro et al., 2020). S

> DU
> Y
> M
> X

3. (Feasibility Analysis) The graph distinguishes stable from unstable relationships. The pathway Y ←

U → S → X represents the stable signal we aim to learn. In contrast, the pathway D → M → X is unstable because marking strategies vary across institutions. A robust model requires mitigating the influence of M

on X, either by detecting and removing artifacts during data preprocessing or by enforcing invariance during model training. This raises a practical question of whether sufficient predictive signal remains once shortcut cues are suppressed. Fortunately, the availability of multi-site datasets with varying artifact distributions makes generalization approaches feasible in this setting (Bissoto et al., 2022). We can also choose between non-adaptive solutions (removing artifacts during preprocessing) and adaptive solutions (learning to ignore artifacts through DG techniques), which are possible given the availability of multi-site datasets with varying artifact distributions (Bissoto et al., 2022). 4. (Deployment Strategies) We have now identified that shortcut features exist which we want to avoid relying on during deployment. One approach to deal with this problem is using counterfactual image generation to synthetically remove shortcuts from training data (Weng et al., 2024). These methods generate modified images where markers are inpainted, allowing us to verify whether a model’s predictions rely on artifacts. By training exclusively on shortcut-free images, we ensure the model learns to rely on the visual appearance of the skin lesion instead of the markers. Alternatively, when multiple training environments with different artifact distributions are available (e.g., from different hospitals), we can employ DG methods (Bissoto et al., 2022; Yan et al., 2023). These ap-proaches explicitly partition training data by artifact type and learn representations that suppress features correlated with environment D while preserving those correlated with disease Y . By training to be in-variant across these diverse artifact distributions, the model becomes robust to novel marking conventions encountered during deployment. 

5.2 Case study on dementia severity prognosis 

Consider the problem of predicting Dementia Severity in two years time. Developing models on research data, such as Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2, and then deploying them within real clinical settings can be challenging due to various potential data shifts. Below, we demonstrate how our causal framework can help us anticipate and act on certain data shifts that will result in a more robust predictor. 

1. (Problem Conceptualization) The prediction target is a probability of developing severe dementia in two years, denoted with a binary variable Y . Even when an individual has been diagnosed with dementia, we may still be interested in predicting whether dementia symptoms will become severe in two years time. Furthermore, we have access to two other important variables in our development dataset: donepezil pre-scription , commonly prescribed for Alzheimer’s disease symptoms (Seltzer, 2005), denoted with D, and the 

p-tau217 biomarker used as reliable amyloid positivity predictor (Janelidze et al., 2020), indicated with B.2. (Causal Description) At first, it might be tempting to simply model the problem as P (Y |D, B ), which may perform well in development. However, eliciting the data generating process in the form of the augmented causal graph will reveal potential data shifts that will degrade model’s predictive performance when deployed in a clinic. Upon further examination, we may realize that donepezil prescription policy may vary between sites (e.g., conservative vs. prevention first), denoted with S.

> 2https://adni.loni.usc.edu/

13 For instance, in a clinic with a conservative policy ( S=1 ), donepezil may be prescribed to patients with already advanced symptoms, in which case severe dementia will occur shortly afterwards. A model trained on data from this clinic will predict high probability of Y if the prescription is present ( D=1 ). However, if the same model will be deployed within a clinic where donepezil is prescribed even when early signs of dementia are observed ( S=2 ), it will incorrectly predict very likely severe dementia in the near future because of the prescription, even though the severe symptoms are more likely to occur only in the further future. Furthermore, we recognize that Y , D and B have the same underlying (unobserved) cause that is neurode-generation (N ). The causal graph will then look as follows: Y 

> S
> BD
> N

3. (Feasibility Analysis) The graph helps us identify an unstable variable D due to changes in prescription policies between sites ( S), whereas the biomarker B is expected to be stable across the development and deployment environments. In this scenario, generalization is feasible by, for example, excluding the unstable variables from the model. Using D will improve model performance in development, but we may see the performance drop during deployment. If this drop is small, then we may be able to use D anyways for deployment. If the drop is large, then it is best to not use D. Knowing which case is more likely is difficult to assess, but the model could be stress tested to quantify the sensitivity to this shift. Alternatively, we may consider to keep D but account for the statistical difference in the prescription policy using re-weighting methods (details in Box 4), but only if we have access to deployment data before using the model in production. 4. (Deployment Strategies) Given the analysis in the previous steps, our main deployment strategy is to exclude the information about donepezil prescription due to its expected instability across sites. As a result, our final model will use only the biomarker B to predict dementia severity: P (Y |B). If, however, deployment data are available beforehand, it is possible to model P (Y |B, D ) while re-adjusting D to the new prescription policy. 

5.3 Case study on hospital readmission 

Consider a predictive model designed to identify the risk of hospital readmission for patients with Congestive Heart Failure (H). Identification of patients who are likely to be readmitted is important to allow targeted interventions that reduce mortality rates (Pishgar et al., 2022). A common challenge in clinical informatics is that models developed in specialized, high-acuity centers often fail when deployed in community hospitals due to differences in admission criteria. Below, we apply our causal framework to address this selection-induced dataset shift. 

1. (Problem Conceptualization) The prediction target is the risk of readmission with heart failure, denoted by a binary variable Y (where Y is therefore a proxy for the severity of H). We use another chronic condition, 

Severe Asthma (A), as one of the predictor variables. To account for the shift, we include an environment variable E which records the hospital’s admission policy. In Environment 1 (Training), the hospital has a strict admission policy (specialized acute hospital), whereas Environment 2 (Deployment) has a more inclusive policy (community hospital). 2. (Causal Description) We must identify the structural dependencies in the data-generating process, which we visualize below. In the general population, heart failure ( H) and asthma ( A) are independent. However, both are causes for hospital admission ( S). Thus, S is a collider variable (Hernán and Monge, 2023). 

14 S=1  

> AH
> E
> Y

In our training environment, we only observe data where S = 1 . Conditioning on this collider induces a spurious correlation between A and H (this is known in the epidemiology literature as Berkson’s bias, but is of course collider bias/selection under the null (Westreich, 2012)). Mathematically, the observed distribution is P (A, H |S = 1 , E ). The shift occurs because the mechanism P (S = 1 |A, H ) changes across environments 

E, altering the strength of this spurious association. This means that the predictive role of A is unstable, and the model should prefer not to use this predictor. 3. (Feasibility Analysis) By identifying S as a collider, we recognize that the relationship between A and 

H is non-structural; it is an artifact of the selection process. A standard model would learn that asthma is "protective" against heart failure readmission simply because patients without asthma must have had more severe heart failure to be admitted. Because this relationship is mediated by the selection node S, it is not 

transportable to environments with different admission thresholds. Recovery is feasible if we can estimate the selection propensity or identify features that are d-separated (Hernán and Robins, 2020) from the selection mechanism. 4. (Deployment Strategies) To deal with this problem, we employ a causal re-weighting strategy. We use Inverse Probability Weighting (IPW) (Chesnaye et al., 2022) to adjust the training loss, where each sample is weighted by W = 1 /P (S = 1 |A, H ). This effectively "undoes" the selection bias of the training hospital, forcing the model to ignore the spurious link between A and H. By training on this pseudo-population, the model learns a stable relationship that remains valid even as the admission policy E changes at the deployment site. This does, however, require data on those who were not admitted. An alternative would be that we use prior knowledge to tell us that A and H are in fact independent in the unselected population. 

## 6 Conclusion 

Developing reusable models in a world with data shifts requires causality. By using causal reasoning, prac-titioners can move from ad-hoc strategies to a principled methodology. We do not argue that causality is a panacea for all data shift problems, but rather it provides a clear line of thinking with which we can frame and propose solutions to many problems. By formalizing this process of reasoning into a four-staged framework, we build a bridge that allows machine learners and domain experts like clinicians and doctors alike to contribute to the process of building better models. Augmented causal graphs serve as a key part of this framework, providing a concise language to express diverse data shifts in a unified manner. While we acknowledge that the complexities of healthcare may extend into sociotechnical realms that evade formal mathematical descriptions, these causal descriptions provide a strong foundation for identifying when prob-lems can be solved. Ultimately, the value of the causal perspective is not just about proposing new tools to address data shifts, but also about knowing which tools to use in the first place. 

## Acknowledgments 

We acknowledge the support of the UKRI AI programme, and the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, for CHAI - Causality in Healthcare AI Hub [grant number EP/Y028856/1]. 

## References 

Jayant N Acharya and Vinita J Acharya. Overview of EEG montages and principles of localization. Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology , 36(5):325–329, 2019. Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.02893 .15 Banafsheh Arshi, Laure Wynants, Eline Rijnhart, Kelly Reeve, Laura Elizabeth Cowley, and Luc J Smits. Number of publications on new clinical prediction models: A bibliometric review. JMIR Medical Infor-matics , 13:e62710, 2025. Alceu Bissoto, Michel Fornaciali, Eduardo Valle, and Sandra Avila. (de) constructing bias on skin lesion datasets. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops , 2019. Alceu Bissoto, Eduardo Valle, and Sandra Avila. Debiasing skin lesion datasets and models? not so fast. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops ,pages 740–741, 2020. Alceu Bissoto, Catarina Barata, Eduardo Valle, and Sandra Avila. Artifact-based domain generalization of skin lesion models. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 133–149. Springer, 2022. Jose Blanchet, Jiajin Li, Sirui Lin, and Xuhui Zhang. Distributionally robust optimization and robust statistics. Statistical Science , 40(3):351–377, 2025. Arthur Brant, Preeti Singh, Xiang Yin, Lu Yang, Jay Nayar, Divleen Jeji, Yossi Matias, Greg S Corrado, Dale R Webster, Sunny Virmani, et al. Performance of a deep learning diabetic retinopathy algorithm in India. JAMA Network Open , 8(3):e250984–e250984, 2025. Ivan A Bratchenko and Lyudmila A Bratchenko. Overestimation of the classification model for Raman spectroscopy data of biological samples. MSystems , 10(4):e00063–25, 2025. Daniel C Castro, Ian Walker, and Ben Glocker. Causality matters in medical imaging. Nature Communica-tions , 11(1):3673, 2020. Sireesha Chamarthi, Katharina Fogelberg, Titus J. Brinker, and Julia Niebling. Mitigating the influence of domain shift in skin lesion classification: A benchmark study of unsupervised domain adaptation methods. 

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked , 44:101430, 2024. ISSN 2352-9148. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imu. 2023.101430. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352914823002769 .Nicholas C. Chesnaye, Vianda S. Stel, Giovanni Tripepi, Friedo W. Dekker, Edouard L. Fu, Carmine Zoccali, and Kitty J. Jager. An introduction to inverse probability of treatment weighting in observational research. 

Clinical Kidney Journal , 15(1):14–20, 2022. doi: 10.1093/ckj/sfab158. Samuel N Cohen, James Foster, Peter Foster, Hang Lou, Terry Lyons, Sam Morley, James Morrill, Hao Ni, Edward Palmer, Bo Wang, et al. Subtle variation in sepsis-iii definitions markedly influences predictive performance within and across methods. Scientific Reports , 14(1):1920, 2024. Gary S Collins, Karel GM Moons, Paula Dhiman, Richard D Riley, Andrew L Beam, Ben Van Calster, Marzyeh Ghassemi, Xiaoxuan Liu, Johannes B Reitsma, Maarten Van Smeden, et al. TRIPOD+ AI statement: updated guidance for reporting clinical prediction models that use regression or machine learning methods. bmj , 385, 2024. Andrew Philip Dawid. Decision-theoretic foundations of statistical causality. Journal of Causal Inference ,9:39–77, 2021. Yifan Duan, Jian Zhao, Junyuan Mao, Hao Wu, Jingyu Xu, Caoyuan Ma, Kai Wang, Kun Wang, Xuelong Li, et al. Causal deciphering and inpainting in spatio-temporal dynamics via diffusion model. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:107604–107632, 2024. Andre Esteva, Brett Kuprel, Roberto A. Novoa, Justin M. Ko, Susan M. Swetter, Helen M. Blau, and Sebastian Thrun. Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks. Nature , 542: 115–118, 2017. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:3767412 .Tongtong Fang, Nan Lu, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama. Rethinking importance weighting for deep learning under distribution shift. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:11996–12007, 2020. 16 Alvan R Feinstein, Daniel M Sosin, and Carolyn K Wells. The Will Rogers phenomenon: stage migration and new diagnostic techniques as a source of misleading statistics for survival in cancer. New England Journal of Medicine , 312(25):1604–1608, 1985. Shaswath Ganapathi, Jo Palmer, Joseph E. Alderman, Melanie Calvert, Cyrus Espinoza, Jacqui Gath, Marzyeh Ghassemi, Katherine Heller, Francis Mckay, Alan Karthikesalingam, Stephanie Kuku, Maxine Mackintosh, Sinduja Manohar, Bilal A. Mateen, Rubeta Matin, Melissa McCradden, Lauren Oakden-Rayner, Johan Ordish, Russell Pearson, Stephen R. Pfohl, Negar Rostamzadeh, Elizabeth Sapey, Neil Se-bire, Viknesh Sounderajah, Charlotte Summers, Darren Treanor, Alastair K. Denniston, and Xiaoxuan Liu. Tackling bias in ai health datasets through the standing together initiative. Nature Medicine , 28(11):2232– 2233, 2022. doi: 10.1038/s41591-022-01987-w. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01987-w .Yaroslav Ganin and Victor Lempitsky. Unsupervised domain adaptation by backpropagation. In Interna-tional conference on machine learning , pages 1180–1189. PMLR, 2015. Irena Gao, Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Out-of-domain robustness via targeted augmentations. In International conference on machine learning , pages 10800–10834. PMLR, 2023. Ben Glocker, Robert Robinson, Daniel C Castro, Qi Dou, and Ender Konukoglu. Machine learning with multi-site imaging data: An empirical study on the impact of scanner effects. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04597 , 2019. Boqing Gong, Yuan Shi, Fei Sha, and Kristen Grauman. Geodesic flow kernel for unsupervised domain adaptation. In 2012 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 2066–2073. IEEE, 2012. MA Gosse. How accurate is self-reported BMI? Nutrition Bulletin , 39(1):105–114, 2014. John Hartley, Pedro P Sanchez, Fasih Haider, and Sotirios A Tsaftaris. Neural networks memorise personal information from one sample. Scientific Reports , 13(1):21366, 2023. Miguel A. Hernán and Susana Monge. Selection bias due to conditioning on a collider. BMJ , 381:p1135, 2023. doi: 10.1136/bmj.p1135. Miguel A. Hernán and James M. Robins. Causal Inference: What If . Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, 2020. Graeme L. Hickey, Stuart W. Grant, Gavin J. Murphy, Moninder Bhabra, Domenico Pagano, Katherine McAllister, Iain Buchan, and Ben Bridgewater. Dynamic trends in cardiac surgery: why the logistic euroscore is no longer suitable for contemporary cardiac surgery and implications for future risk models. 

European Journal of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery , 43:1146–1152, 6 2013. ISSN 1010-7940. doi: 10.1093/ EJCTS/EZS584. URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ejcts/ezs584 .Julia Hippisley-Cox, Carol Coupland, and Peter Brindle. Development and validation of qrisk3 risk prediction algorithms to estimate future risk of cardiovascular disease: prospective cohort study. BMJ , 357, 2017. doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099. URL https://www.bmj.com/content/357/bmj.j2099 .Timothy Hospedales, Antreas Antoniou, Paul Micaelli, and Amos Storkey. Meta-learning in neural networks: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 44(9):5149–5169, 2021. Ahmed Hossain. Utilizing machine learning and causal graph approaches to address confounding factors in health science research: a scoping review. F1000Research , 14:129, 2025. Yeon-Mi Hwang, Madelena Y Ng, Malvika Pillai, Michelle P Sahai, and Tina Hernandez-Boussard. The landscape of ai implementation in us hospitals. Nature Health , 1(1):99–112, 2026. Kasra Jalaldoust, Alexis Bellot, and Elias Bareinboim. Partial transportability for domain generalization. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:137768–137805, 2024. 17 Shorena Janelidze, Erik Stomrud, Ruben Smith, Sebastian Palmqvist, Niklas Mattsson, David C Airey, Nicholas K Proctor, Xiyun Chai, Sergey Shcherbinin, John R Sims, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid p-tau217 performs better than p-tau181 as a biomarker of alzheimer’s disease. Nature communications , 11(1):1683, 2020. Charles Jones, Daniel C Castro, Fabio De Sousa Ribeiro, Ozan Oktay, Melissa McCradden, and Ben Glocker. A causal perspective on dataset bias in machine learning for medical imaging. Nature Machine Intelligence ,6(2):138–146, 2024. Sameer S Kadri, Jake Gundrum, Sarah Warner, Zhun Cao, Ahmed Babiker, Michael Klompas, and Ning Rosenthal. Uptake and accuracy of the diagnosis code for COVID-19 among US hospitalizations. Jama ,324(24):2553–2554, 2020. Jivat Neet Kaur, Emre Kıcıman, and Amit Sharma. Modeling the data-generating process is necessary for out-of-distribution generalization. 11th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023 , 6 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2206.07837 .James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 114(13):3521–3526, 2017. J.André Knottnerus. Between iatrotropic stimulus and interiatric referral:: the domain of primary care research. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology , 55(12):1201–1206, 2002. ISSN 0895-4356. doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/S0895-4356(02)00528-0. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S0895435602005280 .Brian Kulis, Kate Saenko, and Trevor Darrell. What you saw is not what you get: Domain adaptation using asymmetric kernel transforms. In CVPR 2011 , pages 1785–1792. IEEE, 2011. Mariska MG Leeflang, Patrick MM Bossuyt, and Les Irwig. Diagnostic test accuracy may vary with preva-lence: implications for evidence-based diagnosis. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology , 62(1):5–12, 2009. Bo Li, Yifei Shen, Yezhen Wang, Wenzhen Zhu, Dongsheng Li, Kurt Keutzer, and Han Zhao. Invariant information bottleneck for domain generalization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 36, pages 7399–7407, 2022. Bing Liu. Learning on the job: Online lifelong and continual learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 34, pages 13544–13549, 2020. Sara Magliacane, Thijs van Ommen, Tom Claassen, Stephan Bongers, Philip Versteeg, and Joris M. Mooij. Domain adaptation by using causal inference to predict invariant conditional distributions. In Proceed-ings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS’18, page 10869–10879, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2018. Curran Associates Inc. Arjun K Manrai, Birgit H Funke, Heidi L Rehm, Morten S Olesen, Bradley A Maron, Peter Szolovits, David M Margulies, Joseph Loscalzo, and Isaac S Kohane. Genetic misdiagnoses and the potential for health disparities. New England Journal of Medicine , 375(7):655–665, 2016. Maya B Mathur and Ilya Shpitser. Simple graphical rules for assessing selection bias in general-population and selected-sample treatment effects. American Journal of Epidemiology , 194(1):267–277, 2025. Siobhan McLernon. The Glasgow coma scale 40 years on: a review of its practical use. British Journal of Neuroscience Nursing , 10(4):179–184, 2014. Thomas Melistas, Nikos Spyrou, Nefeli Gkouti, Pedro Sanchez, Athanasios Vlontzos, Yannis Panagakis, Giorgos Papanastasiou, and Sotirios A Tsaftaris. Benchmarking counterfactual image generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:133207–133230, 2024. Krikamol Muandet, David Balduzzi, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Domain generalization via invariant feature representation. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 10–18. PMLR, 2013. 18 Jasmine Chiat Ling Ong, Yilin Ning, Rui Yang, Danielle S Bitterman, Xiaoxuan Liu, Yih Chung Tham, Gary S Collins, Michelle María Jiménez de Tavárez, Bilal A Mateen, Kwesi Nyan Amissah-Arthur, et al. Large language models in global health. Nature Health , 1(1):35–47, 2026. Cheng Ouyang, Chen Chen, Surui Li, Zeju Li, Chen Qin, Wenjia Bai, and Daniel Rueckert. Causality-inspired single-source domain generalization for medical image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imag-ing , 42(4):1095–1106, 2022. Judea Pearl. Causality . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2009. Judea Pearl and Elias Bareinboim. Transportability of causal and statistical relations: A formal approach. 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 25:247–254, 8 2011. ISSN 2374-3468. doi: 10.1609/AAAI.V25I1.7861. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/7861 .Jonas Peters, Peter Bühlmann, and Nicolai Meinshausen. Causal inference by using invariant prediction: identification and confidence intervals. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Method-ology , 78(5):947–1012, 2016. Maryam Pishgar, Julian Theis, Marina Del Rios, Amer Ardati, Hadis Anahideh, and Houshang Darabi. Prediction of unplanned 30-day readmission for icu patients with heart failure. BMC medical informatics and decision making , 22(1):117, 2022. Stephen R Pye, Thérèse Sheppard, Rebecca M Joseph, Mark Lunt, Nadyne Girard, Jennifer S Haas, David W Bates, David L Buckeridge, Tjeerd P van Staa, Robyn Tamblyn, et al. Assumptions made when preparing drug exposure data for analysis have an impact on results: An unreported step in pharmacoepidemiology studies. Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety , 27(7):781–788, 2018. Abbavaram Gowtham Reddy, Celia Rubio-Madrigal, Rebekka Burkholz, and Krikamol Muandet. When shift happens - confounding is to blame. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=sFjxg8cyJS .Jonathan Richens and Tom Everitt. Robust agents learn causal world models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=pOoKI3ouv1 .Melanie Roschewitz, Galvin Khara, Joe Yearsley, Nisha Sharma, Jonathan J James, Eva Ambrozay, Adam Heroux, Peter Kecskemethy, Tobias Rijken, and Ben Glocker. Automatic correction of performance drift under acquisition shift in medical image classification. Nature Communications , 14(1):6608, 2023. Markus Rupp, Walter Kellermann, Abdelhak Zoubir, and Gerhard Schmidt. Advances in adaptive filtering theory and applications to acoustic and speech signal processing. EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing , 2016(1):63, 2016. Shiori Sagawa*, Pang Wei Koh*, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=ryxGuJrFvS .Berkman Sahiner, Weijie Chen, Ravi K Samala, and Nicholas Petrick. Data drift in medical machine learning: implications and potential remedies. The British Journal of Radiology , 96(1150):20220878, 2023. Olawale Elijah Salaudeen, Haoran Zhang, Kumail Alhamoud, Sara Beery, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Aggre-gation hides out-of-distribution generalization failures from spurious correlations. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Olawale Elijah Salaudeen, Nicole Chiou, Shiny Weng, and Sanmi Koyejo. Are domain generalization bench-marks with accuracy on the line misspecified? Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2025. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=fNywRyqPQo .Bernhard Schölkopf, Dominik Janzing, Jonas Peters, Eleni Sgouritsa, Kun Zhang, and Joris Mooij. On causal and anticausal learning. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Machine Learning ,ICML’12, page 459–466, Madison, WI, USA, 2012. Omnipress. ISBN 9781450312851. 19 Ben Seltzer. Donepezil: a review. Expert opinion on drug metabolism & toxicology , 1(3):527–536, 2005. Mervyn Singer, Clifford S Deutschman, Christopher Warren Seymour, Manu Shankar-Hari, Djillali Annane, Michael Bauer, Rinaldo Bellomo, Gordon R Bernard, Jean-Daniel Chiche, Craig M Coopersmith, et al. The third international consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock (sepsis-3). Jama , 315(8):801–810, 2016. Matthew Sperrin, Richard D Riley, Gary S Collins, and Glen P Martin. Targeted validation: validating clinical prediction models in their intended population and setting. Diagnostic and prognostic research , 6 (1):24, 2022. Vallijah Subasri, Amrit Krishnan, Ali Kore, Azra Dhalla, Deval Pandya, Bo Wang, David Malkin, Fahad Razak, Amol A Verma, Anna Goldenberg, et al. Detecting and remediating harmful data shifts for the responsible deployment of clinical AI models. JAMA Network Open , 8(6):e2513685–e2513685, 2025. Adarsh Subbaswamy and Suchi Saria. Counterfactual normalization: Proactively addressing dataset shift using causal mechanisms. In 34th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence 2018, UAI 2018 ,pages 947–957. Association For Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (AUAI), 2018. Adarsh Subbaswamy and Suchi Saria. From development to deployment: dataset shift, causality, and shift-stable models in health ai. Biostatistics , 21:345–352, 4 2020. ISSN 1465-4644. doi: 10.1093/ BIOSTATISTICS/KXZ041. URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/biostatistics/kxz041 .Adarsh Subbaswamy, Bryant Chen, and Suchi Saria. A unifying causal framework for analyzing dataset shift-stable learning algorithms. Journal of Causal Inference , 10:64–89, 1 2022. ISSN 21933685. doi: 10.1515/JCI-2021-0042/ASSET/GRAPHIC/J_JCI-2021-0042_FIG_006.JPG. URL https://www. degruyterbrill.com/document/doi/10.1515/jci-2021-0042/html .Niccolò Tempini and James Lowe. The AI shift spectrum: A sociotechnical reconceptualization of AI performance in healthcare. Poster presented at the UK AI Research Symposium (UKAIRS), Newcastle, 8–9 September 2025, 2025. Chris Xing Tian, Haoliang Li, Yufei Wang, and Shiqi Wang. Privacy-preserving constrained domain general-ization via gradient alignment. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 36(5):2142–2150, 2023. Katherine Tsai, Stephen R Pfohl, Olawale Salaudeen, Nicole Chiou, Matt Kusner, Alexander D’Amour, Sanmi Koyejo, and Arthur Gretton. Proxy methods for domain adaptation. In Sanjoy Dasgupta, Stephan Mandt, and Yingzhen Li, editors, Proceedings of The 27th International Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence and Statistics , volume 238 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 3961–3969. PMLR, 02–04 May 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v238/tsai24b.html .Ben Van Calster, Ewout W. Steyerberg, Laure Wynants, and Maarten van Smeden. There is no such thing as a validated prediction model. BMC Medicine , 21(1):70, 2023. doi: 10.1186/s12916-023-02779-w. URL 

https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-023-02779-w .Ben Van Calster, Maarten van Smeden, Wouter van Amsterdam, Maarten Coemans, Laure Wynants, and Ewout W Steyerberg. The enemies of reliable and useful clinical prediction models: a review of statistical and scientific challenges. Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application , 13, 2025. Daniel Vela, Andrew Sharp, Richard Zhang, Trang Nguyen, An Hoang, and Oleg S Pianykh. Temporal quality degradation in ai models. Scientific Reports , 12(1):11654, 2022. Riccardo Volpi, Hongseok Namkoong, Ozan Sener, John C Duchi, Vittorio Murino, and Silvio Savarese. Generalizing to unseen domains via adversarial data augmentation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 31, 2018. Julius Von Kügelgen, Yash Sharma, Luigi Gresele, Wieland Brendel, Bernhard Schölkopf, Michel Besserve, and Francesco Locatello. Self-supervised learning with data augmentations provably isolates content from style. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:16451–16467, 2021. 20 Dequan Wang, Evan Shelhamer, Shaoteng Liu, Bruno Olshausen, and Trevor Darrell. Tent: Fully test-time adaptation by entropy minimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Qin Wang, Olga Fink, Luc Van Gool, and Dengxin Dai. Continual test-time domain adaptation. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 7201–7211, 2022. Xinyi Wang, Michael Saxon, Jiachen Li, Hongyang Zhang, Kun Zhang, and William Yang Wang. Causal bal-ancing for domain generalization. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=F91SROvVJ_6 .Nina Weng, Paraskevas Pegios, Eike Petersen, Aasa Feragen, and Siavash Bigdeli. Fast diffusion-based counterfactuals for shortcut removal and generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 338–357. Springer, 2024. Daniel Westreich. Berkson’s bias, selection bias, and missing data. Epidemiology , 23(1):159–164, January 2012. doi: 10.1097/EDE.0b013e31823b6296. Julia K Winkler, Christine Fink, Ferdinand Toberer, Alexander Enk, Teresa Deinlein, Rainer Hofmann-Wellenhof, Luc Thomas, Aimilios Lallas, Andreas Blum, Wilhelm Stolz, and Holger A Haenssle. Associa-tion between surgical skin markings in dermoscopic images and diagnostic performance of a deep learning convolutional neural network for melanoma recognition. JAMA Dermatol , 155(10):1135–1141, October 2019. Gordon C. Wishart, Elizabeth M. Azzato, David C. Greenberg, Jem Rashbass, Olive Kearins, Gill Lawrence, Carlos Caldas, and Paul D. P. Pharoah. Predict: a new uk prognostic model that predicts survival following surgery for invasive breast cancer. Breast Cancer Research , 12(1):R1, 2010. doi: 10.1186/bcr2464. URL 

https://doi.org/10.1186/bcr2464 .Siyuan Yan, Chi Liu, Zhen Yu, Lie Ju, Dwarikanath Mahapatra, Victoria Mar, Monika Janda, Peter Soyer, and Zongyuan Ge. Epvt: Environment-aware prompt vision transformer for domain generalization in skin lesion recognition, 2023. Dezhong Yao, Yun Qin, Shiang Hu, Li Dong, Maria L Bringas Vega, and Pedro A Valdés Sosa. Which reference should we use for EEG and ERP practice? Brain Topography , 32(4):530–549, 2019. Kun Zhang, Mingming Gong, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Multi-source domain adaptation: A causal view. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 29, 2015. Marvin Zhang, Henrik Marklund, Nikita Dhawan, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Adap-tive risk minimization: Learning to adapt to domain shift. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:23664–23678, 2021. Kaiyang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, Yu Qiao, Tao Xiang, and Chen Change Loy. Domain generalization: A survey. 

IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 45(4):4396–4415, 2022. 21