Title: Combinatorial epigenomic patterns define regulatory programs underlying disease heterogeneity

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
Combinatorial epigenomic patterns define regulatory programs underlying disease heterogeneity 

Woo Jun Shim 1,3 , Shaine Chenxin Bao 1,3 , Chris Siu Yeung Chow 1, Dalia Mizikovsky 1, Sophie Shen 1, Zachary Riedlshah 2, Qiongyi Zhao 1, Mikael Boden 2,* , Nathan J. Palpant 1,*  

> 1

Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Australia  

> 2

School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Australia  

> 3

Co-first authors  

> *

Co-corresponding authors; Nathan J. Palpant (n.palpant@uq.edu.au), Mikael Boden (m.boden@uq.edu.au) 

Abstract 

Disease is a heterogeneous process that involves multiple organs and cell types. Understanding how genomic variation contributes to disease requires approaches that move beyond the linear assumptions of additive models and resolve underlying disease pathways. While genome-wide association studies have catalogued hundreds of thousands of genomic variants linked to disease, our understanding of their cell-type specific roles remains largely limited, restricting our ability to translate genetic findings into targeted interventions. Here, we analyse consortium-scale epigenomic data spanning 833 biological samples across 8 epigenetic features to develop a generalisable machine learning framework that models the modular architecture of genome regulation. We define 720 epigenomic signatures, Epigenetically Co-Modulated Patterns (EpiCops), that capture co-regulated genomic regions with tissue and cell-specific regulatory activity. Using EpiCops, we effectively segregate functional genomic loci of mixed biological contexts, including cell-type specific enhancers, variants of complex traits and diseases. Applied to type-2-diabetes, EpiCops identify variant clusters associated with distinct biological pathways and organs, including clusters of opposing cardiovascular risk profiles driven by divergent organ-specific regulatory mechanisms. By integrating EpiCops with partitioned polygenic risk score, we further validate robustness of these variant clusters in independent cohort studies. Collectively, our study demonstrates EpiCops as a scalable framework for resolving the cell-type specific regulatory architecture of complex disease and advancing mechanistic understanding of disease processes. 

Introduction 

Understanding genetic architecture of disease remains a central challenge. Despite biobank-scale resources cataloguing hundreds of thousands of disease-associated variants 1, 2 , the prevailing framework for interpreting disease heterogeneity remains surprisingly simplistic; linear models that aggregate genome-wide variant effects into a single measure of risk, polygenic risk score (PRS) 3. While effective for population-level risk prediction, this additive framework has important limitations. First, the assumption of linear contribution overlooks disease heterogeneity and fails to capture complex, non-linear interactions among variants and disease subtypes that affect multiple organ systems and cell types 4, 5 . Second, PRS-based models provide limited mechanistic insight, despite growing evidence that integrating functional genomic information can substantially improve their interpretation and prediction 6-8 . Third, collapsing diverse genetic contributions into a single quantitative score like PRS restricts the ability to resolve disease subtypes. To address these limitations, methods to identify variant subgroups linked to distinct disease mechanisms have been developed by incorporating relevant phenotype correlations 9-11 , biological pathways 4, functional genome annotations 12 , or tissue-specific regulatory elements 13 .For instance, Smith et al. 14 and Suzuki et al. 15 superimposed phenotypic data onto type-2-diabetes (T2D) variants to identify genetically separable sub-disease groups associated with distinct cardiovascular outcomes. While powerful, these approaches depend on prior disease knowledge and quality of curated phenotypes, limiting their scalability and applicability 14, 15 . Therefore, there is a clear need for unsupervised strategies capable of capturing mechanistic structure without relying on disease-specific annotations. Epigenetics can offer a promising avenue to meet this need. Chromatin states, including post-translational histone modifications and chromatin accessibility, dynamically reorganise nucleosomes and regulatory interactions, encoding unique cell identity onto a shared genome 16 . Precise control of these chromatin features 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

is essential for normal development, whereas epigenetic dysregulation is a hallmark of diverse pathologies, including cancer 17-19 , metabolic 20, 21 , respiratory 22, 23 , and cardiovascular diseases 24, 25 . This central regulatory role makes epigenetics a critical layer for understanding disease heterogeneity 26, 27 . For example, Stikker et al. 28 

demonstrated that cross-sample H3K4me2 profiles can partition asthma variants into clinically distinct groups. However, the scarcity of epigenomic data relevant to disease remains the primary bottleneck. Large-scale consortia projects such as Roadmap 29 , Human Cell Atlas 30 , EpiMap 31 and recently released ENCODE4 32 have generated expansive epigenomic maps across diverse tissues and cellular contexts. Together with catalogues of disease-associated regulatory elements 33-35 , these resources provide a robust foundation to extract generalisable epigenomic signatures applicable to disease contexts. Historically, segmentation and genome annotation (SAGA) methods have shown that recurrent combinations of chromatin states encode coherent biological functions applicable to diverse cell states, as exemplified by bivalent promoters in governing developmental trajectory in multiple cell lineages 36 and various cell-type specific cis-regulatory elements 37-39 .However, such models are often trained in specific cellular contexts and rely on pre-defined state labels, limiting their ability to generalise beyond profiled samples. Recently, foundation models trained on large-scale genomic and transcriptomic datasets, such as Geneformer 40 

and scGPT 41 have demonstrated the capacity to learn generalisable genomic representations of complex biological systems. In the epigenomic domain, transformer-based models including EpiGePT 42 , EpiAgent 43 , and EpiBERT 44 have shown efficacy in imputing histone modifications and predicting non-coding variant effects. However, the architectural complexity of these models limits interpretability of learned features. To improve interpretability, approaches that incorporate context-specific epigenomic information 28 or multi-modal phenotypic data 45, 46 have been proposed, but their reliance on carefully curated prior information restricts broader applicability. Here we propose 720 generalisable epigenomic patterns that capture various cell-type specific regulatory elements, complex traits, and disease-associated variation. These patterns, termed Epigenetically Co-modulated Patterns (EpiCops), are interpretable at tissue level across 8 epigenetic marks including seven histone tail modifications and open chromatin state. We demonstrate the utility of EpiCops in parsing variants of diseases and cis-regulatory elements into biologically distinct groups and in improving fine-mapping of causal variants across 28 GWAS complex traits. Importantly, without prior phenotypic information, EpiCops identify clusters of T2D variants associated with distinct cardiovascular co-morbidity profiles. This ability to resolve disease variants into subgroups with divergent organ-specific regulatory contributions and clinical phenotypes highlights EpiCops as a generalisable framework for disease subtyping. This genome-centred clustering approach is highly interpretable, scalable and broadly applicable, providing improved resolution for dissecting disease heterogeneity in individuals. Collectively, EpiCops leverage cell-type specific epigenomic signatures to bridge the gap between regulatory cell biology and phenotypic variation in complex disease. 

Results Models to extract generalisable epigenomic patterns 

We hypothesised that systematic extraction of epigenomic patterns from consortium-level data covering diverse biological contexts can provide a generalisable framework for understanding heterogeneity of disease mechanisms. To this end, we propose a machine learning framework utilising Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) models as its core functional unit for its superior feature interpretability compared to multi-layered neural network-based models ( Figure 1A ). While transformers have recently popularised in prediction tasks, their complex architectures do not necessarily lead to better outcomes compared to simpler baseline models 47, 48 , suggesting that task-dependent model selection is critical. Here, we harness simplicity of RBM model structure to extract interpretable epigenomic patterns that are directly mappable to tissues and cell types 49 .By analysing epigenetic signals across 1kb genomic windows in the human genome, the RBM models yield epigenomic patterns of multiple HMs and chromatin accessibility. These unique signatures capture coordinated tissue and cell type-specific epigenomic activity of multiple epigenetic marks ( Figure 1B ). In this study, we test capacity of these epigenomic patterns, named as epigenetically co-modulated patterns (EpiCops), to deconvolute disease heterogeneity ( Figure 1C ). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

We trained separate RBM models for each of the eight epigenetic marks independently for following reasons. Biologically, each epigenetic mark exhibits unique genomic distributions and regulatory functions. Training separate RBMs enables models to learn mark-specific representations. As each mark exhibits its uniquely complex and context-dependent combinatorial patterns 50 , modelling them all simultaneously can obscure subtle, cell-type-specific signals specific to individual marks. By learning mark-specific representations, the model still retains the flexibility to analyse dependencies in a more structured manner. From a computational perspective, training separate RBMs can address challenges of data dimensionality, training efficiency, and model stability associated with genome-wide epigenomic data across more than 6,000 samples. Through iterative model optimisation (see Methods), we extracted latent epigenomic patterns for each epigenetic mark. The number of EpiCops derived from each mark was determined by selecting the model that minimised loss function on held-out test data ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). In total, we identified 720 EpiCops across the eight epigenetic marks. For the model training, we used epigenomic data comprised of more than 4.61 billion peaks derived from 6,181 diverse biological samples. We binarised the epigenomic data for several advantages as previously demonstrated 29, 37, 38, 51 ; 1. increased robustness to outliers, 2. improved comparability between samples across different epigenetic marks, and 3. substantial reduction in computational load during model training, with minimal information loss. This is particularly important given the scale of the epigenomic datasets derived from the human genome. Collectively, peaks from all samples cover approximately 85% of the human genome (Supplementary Figure 2A ). Despite difference in the number of biosamples between epigenetic marks, proportions of the genome occupied by peaks clearly represented nature of each epigenetic mark, with H3K27me3, H3K4me1, H3K36me3 and H3K9me3 covering larger part of the genome compared to their narrow counterparts ( Supplementary Figure 2B ). Nonetheless, peak locations were generally sample-specific (Supplementary Figure 2C ), with activation-associated HMs such as H3K9ac and H3K27ac, and DNase I hypersensitivity (DNase hereafter), showing greater sample specificity than repressive HMs such as H3K27me3 or H3K9me3 as demonstrated previously 29, 52 . Furthermore, peaks were preferentially co-localised with known regulatory elements, including transcription start sites (TSSs) of protein coding genes (PCGs), FANTOM5 enhancers and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) loci ( Supplementary Figure 2D )53 . Taken together, these results demonstrate that our epigenomic data exhibit strong biological specificity while broadly covering the human genome. 

Genomic architecture and tissue-specific organisation of EpiCops 

EpiCops represent latent weight vectors over 833 EpiMap biological samples. Each pattern captures a distinct tissue and cell type-specific signature ( Figure 1B ). While each EpiCop was independently derived from a single epigenetic mark, groups of EpiCops from different marks collectively exhibited tissue-specific activity (Supplementary Figure 3A ). Samples with similar biological context were grouped together based on their shared epigenomic patterns ( Supplementary Figure 3B ). These results suggest that EpiCops of different epigenetic marks share tissue-level specificity via coordinated epigenetic regulation. EpiCops of different epigenetic marks that were clustered together in the UMAP further support this notion of shared tissue-specificity ( Supplementary Figure 3C ). Despite the tissue-level specificity, it is interesting to note that individual EpiCops have low pairwise similarity at sample level, indicating their capacity to capture intricate biological heterogeneity present in the data ( Figure 2A ). Genome-wide coverage of EpiCops differ markedly across epigenetic marks, reflecting their distinct depositional properties ( Figure 2B ). At the genomic level, this is evident in their distribution, where more than 50% of signals originating from intergenic regions (‘All’ group in Supplementary Figure 3D ). EpiCops showed enrichment in exonic (8%) and intronic (39%) regions compared to their genomic baseline (1.1% and 24%, respectively) 54 , indicating that epigenetic variance captured by EpiCops mainly arises from regulatory regions of the genome. This analysis also revealed locational biases of certain epigenetic marks; H3K27me3 and H3K9me3 were slightly over-represented in intergenic regions due to their broader genomic deposition, while H3K4me1 and H3K36me3 exhibited greater positional variability between intergenic and introgenic regions. In particular, strong association of H3K36me3 with exonic and intronic regions aligns well with its genomic occupancy consensus within gene bodies 55 . Overall, this analysis shows that EpiCop-enriched genomic locations clearly manifest functional and depositional nature of each epigenetic mark. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Further examination of the genomic distribution revealed substantial variation in the number of enriched genomic regions (z>2 relative to the genome-wide distribution) across EpiCops ( Figure 2C ). Based on the prevalence of enriched regions in the genome, EpiCops were classified into four groups; 1. Highly specific (<0.03% of the genome), 2. Specific (1%), 3. Mildly specific (3.2%) or 4. Widespread (>3.2%). For each EpiCop, chromosomal deviation was calculated as the difference between the observed proportion of enriched regions on each chromosome and the expected genome-wide proportion. Genomic prevalence of EpiCops closely mirrored the depositional characteristics of their underlying epigenetic marks. EpiCops derived from narrow marks such as H3K4me3 and H3K27ac were strongly enriched in the highly specific group (<0.03% genome), with odd ratios of 5.6 and 3.6, respectively (FDR < 1.0e-5). DNase-based EpiCops were predominantly associated with the Specific group (1% genome, OR=5.1, FDR=8.5e-8). In contrast, EpiCops derived from broader marks such as H3K36me3, H3K27me3, H3K4me1 and H3K9me3 showed more extensive genomic coverage and minimal chromosomal deviation, with strong enrichment in the Widespread group (>3.2% genome, ORs=7.1, 6.1, 5.9, and 2.3, respectively, FDR<4.3e-3). To assess the extent to which EpiCops capture functionally relevant genomic elements, we quantified their coverage across diverse datasets, including UK Biobank (UKB) variants 2, RefSeq PCGs 56 , cell-type specific enhancers from EnhancerAtlas2.0 57 , and ClinVar pathogenicity variants 58 (Figure 2D ). Across all datasets, the vast majority of loci were associated with at least one EpiCop, with overall coverage of 93-99%. Importantly, most loci were captured by a relatively small subset of EpiCops (<300 EpiCops), indicating their specificity while collectively achieving near-complete representation of epigenomic variation. EpiCops also exhibited structured genomic co-occupancy, particularly among patterns derived from the same epigenetic mark, reflecting shared regulatory functions ( Supplementary Figure 3E ). Beyond this expected concordance, inter-mark co-occupancy revealed biologically meaningful relationships, including the co-occurrence of H3K4me1 and H3K27me3, consistent with poised enhancer states 59 . DNase-associated EpiCops showed widespread co-occurrence across multiple histone marks, indicating their involvement in dynamically regulated chromatin regions. This analysis shows that EpiCops capture coordinated and functionally relevant epigenetic interactions across the genome. Despite differences in genomic coverage, the contribution of EpiCops to explaining epigenomic variation was comparable across marks ( Supplementary Figure 3F ). Feature importance analyses further revealed context-specific enrichment, with promoter-associated marks such as H3K4me3 dominating RefSeq protein coding genes (PCGs) ( Supplementary Figure 3G ), while enhancers showed a more distributed contribution from multiple marks, including H3K4me1, H3K27ac, and DNase ( Supplementary Figure 3H ). Collectively, these analyses indicate that EpiCops capture functionally relevant and context-dependent regulatory signals despite their diverse genomic prevalence. 

Functional characterisation of EpiCops 

To assess functional relevance of EpiCops, we performed transcription factor (TF) motif enrichment analysis across genomic loci associated with each EpiCop using 450 TFs from HOMER 60 . Loci associated with activation-associated marks such as H3K4me3, H3K9ac, H3K27ac, and DNase displayed stronger TF motif enrichment compared to repressive marks ( Supplementary Figure 4A ). Interestingly, regions marked by H3K36me3, which commonly mark transcribed gene body 61 , were depleted of TF motifs, indicating their relative lack of regulatory roles compared to other regulatory loci associated with different marks 62 . To further resolve tissue-specific regulatory programs, we identified EpiCops with high tissue-specific weights (z>2) in brain and heart ( Supplementary Figures 4B and 4C ). These patterns aligned with distinct TF motif signatures, including enrichment of NEUROD1/G2, LHX3 and NPAS in brain, and HAND2, TBX5 and GATA6 in heart (Supplementary Figures 4D and 4E ), with minimal overlap between tissues. To further investigate the functional diversity captured by EpiCops, we examined their combinatorial patterns at transcription state sites (TSSs) of PCGs. We define combinatorial patterns as co-occurring EpiCops derived from the same epigenetic mark at TSSs. Using these combinatorial patterns, we grouped genes for gene ontology (GO) 63 and KEGG pathway 64 enrichment analysis. In total, 2,780 unique GO biological process terms ( Figure 2E ) and 174 KEGG pathway terms ( Supplementary Figure 4F ) were significantly associated with 228 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

combinatorial patterns across epigenetic marks. Most terms were linked to a limited subset of combinatorial patterns ( Supplementary Figures 4G and 4H ), indicating capacity of EpiCops to capture highly specific biological programs. In terms of term coverage, H3K4me3-associated combinatorial patterns were linked to the largest number of GO BP terms (1,502 total terms) ( Figure 2E ). On the other hand, H3K27me3 were linked to the largest number of unique GO and KEGG terms that are not shared with other epigenetic marks, recapitulating broad association of H3K27me3 with diverse biological pathways 65 .To assess the robustness of EpiCops across different model architectures, we compared original EpiCops derived from RBM with those obtained using a linear discrete variational autoencoder (LD-VAE), a probabilistic latent variable model that captures sparse and interpretable feature representations 66 . Despite differences in model architecture, EpiCops from both approaches captured consistent global structure, with moderate correlations across EpiCops ( Supplementary Figure 5A ). This concordance extended to functional grouping of PCGs based on EpiCops derived from both models showed high agreement for key regulatory marks for PCGs such as H3K4me3, H3K4me1, and DNase (ARI>0.8) ( Supplementary Figure 5B ). Importantly, both approaches yielded comparable numbers of gene clusters ( Supplementary Figure 5C ), demonstrating that underlying biology is largely preserved irrespective of the extraction method. These results show that EpiCops capture robust and biologically meaningful epigenomic features largely independent of the model architecture. Given the functional specificity and robustness captured by EpiCops, we next evaluated whether EpiCops could be leveraged for predictive modelling of regulatory and disease-associated loci. To this end, we trained deep neural network (DNN)-based classification models using EpiCops extracted from genomic loci of 35,625 enhancers uniquely associated with 51 tissue and cell types 57 and 2,386 SNPs linked to 22 different diseases 58 .Results showed that incorporation of EpiCops achieved median AUCs of 0.8 and 0.93 for enhancer and disease classification respectively, consistently outperforming random prediction models ( Figure 2F ). This analysis demonstrates that EpiCops capture biologically meaningful regulatory information predictive of cell and disease-specific genomic activity. Next, we assessed the capacity of EpiCops to resolve tissue-specific regulatory activity in a multi-class setting. A single DNN model trained on enhancers from left ventricle in heart, liver, and cerebellum accurately classified their tissue of origin in the test set ( Supplementary Figure 4I ), highlighting the discriminative power of EpiCops. Furthermore, EpiCops derived from cell type-specific PCGs enhanced prediction accuracy of expression states of cell type-specific lncRNAs across 54 tissues ( Supplementary Figure 4J ), suggesting potential of EpiCops as broadly applicable features in modelling transcriptional regulation. Taken together, these results establish EpiCops as generalisable epigenomic features capable of capturing regulatory programs across diverse cell and disease contexts. 

EpiCops resolve genomic loci into tissue-level epigenomic signal 

Given epigenetic marks act in a coordinated manner to regulate biological function, we hypothesised that EpiCops could be used to resolve genomic loci into tissue-level biology. To summarise these co-modulated signals, we first identified 81 principal components of genome-wide EpiCops that explain 95% of the variance and show clear tissue-level specificity ( Supplementary Figure 6A and 6B ). When applied to 75 UK Biobank GWAS traits including immune/inflammatory, neurological, cardiovascular, and haematologic traits, these components effectively clustered them into distinct groups ( Supplementary Figure 6C ), indicating that variants associated with similar diseases converge on common tissue-level epigenomic patterns. This connection was also evident in individual traits. For instance, atrial fibrillation variants show strong H3K4me1 enrichment specifically in cardiac tissues, suggesting enhancer activity in the heart ( Figure 3A ). This tissue-specific regulatory signal was further supported by heritability analysis where variants associated with a heart-specific EpiCop (z>2) exhibit high inclusion posterior probability (PIP>0.6), indicating a strong link to causal variants underlying atrial fibrillation ( Supplementary Figure 6D ). Consistent with this, incorporating EpiCops into fine-mapping analysis significantly improved resolution for credible sizes compared to a model without annotations across 28 complex traits (p=0.0015, Wilcoxon ranksum test) ( Figures 3B and 3C ), suggesting the capacity of EpiCops to capture causal mechanisms of complex traits. Leveraging on the tissue-specific regulatory signals captured by EpiCops, we next questioned whether EpiCops could deconvolute mixed sets of genomic loci into their underlying biological contexts. To this end, we adopted 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

an unsupervised consensus clustering framework 67 to derive robust variant clusters across different clustering resolutions ( Figure 3D ). By applying this framework to combined datasets of lead variants from 14 diseases 68 ,enhancers 57 or eQTL loci 69 from 5 different tissue groups, we demonstrated that EpiCops effectively segregated these loci into biologically coherent clusters, outperforming random clustering in terms of ARI (p<1e-16, Figure 3E and Supplementary Figures 6E and 6F ). These clusters show distinct epigenomic signatures directly mappable to tissue and cell types. For instance, asthma-associated clusters show strong H3K4me1 enrichment in blood and immune cells, which is consistent with established immunological response in asthma ( Figure 3F ). Similarly, uterine cancer-associated clusters display depleted H3K9me3 signal in reproductive tissues, aligning well with established roles of this epigenetic mark in endometrial cancer 70 and uterine sarcomas 71 . Furthermore, clusters of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and venous thromboembolism (VTE) exhibit strong H3K27me3 deviations in endothelial cells ( Supplementary Figure 7 ), which is supported by known pathological role of endothelial dysfunction in these diseases 72, 73 . Stroke-associated clusters showed enrichment of H3K4me1 and H3K36me3 in blood and immune cells, consistent with known immune-mediated mechanisms in this disease 74 .On the other hand, primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) clusters showed more complex epigenomic associations that are supported by previous studies linking to multiple organ systems including metabolic 75 ,immune and neuroendocrine tissues 76, 77 . Taken together, these analyses demonstrate capacity of EpiCops as a highly generalisable features to map genomic loci to tissue-level epigenomic activity, allowing interpretation of disease-associated variants and unsupervised parsing of disease heterogeneity into biologically meaningful groups. 

EpiCops segregate disease-specific variants in polygenic models 

Given the ability of EpiCops to resolve genomic loci into tissue-level regulatory signals, we next questioned whether EpiCops could segregate variants from distinct diseases in polygenic models ( Figure 4A ). To test this, we first constructed a composite variant set from two distinct diseases (Asthma and Gout) and applied EpiCops to cluster these variants. The result showed that incorporation of EpiCop-derived clusters significantly improved the model’s capacity to explain variance, measured by R-squared values ( Figure 4B ), indicating EpiCop clustering facilitates effective separation of variants of these two diseases. This separation was reflected in coherent groups of variants distinctly partitioned between asthma and gout (Figure 4C ). Examination of the underlying epigenomic signals revealed tissue-level difference, where asthma-associated clusters showed enrichment of H3K36me3 signals in blood and immune-related cells whereas gout-associated clusters exhibited stronger signals in kidney and urinary tissues ( Figure 4D ). Extending this analysis to additional disease pairs, we observed consistent improvements in model performance with the incorporation of EpiCop-derived variant clustering information compared to the baseline PRS models ( Supplementary Figures 8A-C ). Collectively, these results demonstrate the utility of EpiCops to deconvolute mixed disease architectures in polygenic models. 

EpiCops resolve cardiometabolic heterogeneity in type-2 diabetes 

Given the capacity of EpiCops to segregate disease variants in polygenic settings, we next tested whether they could resolve heterogeneity within a single complex disease. We focused on T2D, a heterogenous cardiometabolic disorder characterised by multi-organ dysfunction and disease pathways. By applying EpiCops to T2D-associated variants from UK Biobank (UKB), we identified variant clusters associated with 36 cardiometabolic traits covering 6 major biological systems ( Figure 5A ). While the aggregate association across all T2D variants recapitulates expected disease manifestations (WG column), individual clusters captured distinct and selective trait enrichment patterns. To assess the biological relevance of EpiCop-derived clusters, we compared their trait association profiles with phenotype-driven variant clusters defined by Smith et al. 14 (Supplementary Figure 9A ). EpiCop clusters showed strong concordance with phenotype-based clusters, with maximum Pearson’s correlation close to 1 across all clusters. As expected, the phenotype-informed clustering method produced highly defined and selective trait associations, particularly for lipid and glycaemic traits, reflecting its great reliance on curated T2D phenotypes ( Supplementary Figure 9B ). Despite this, head-to-head benchmarking showed no significant 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

difference between EpiCops and the phenotype-based method in identifying variant clusters enriched for the cardiometabolic traits ( Supplementary Figure 9C and 9D ), demonstrating that EpiCops achieve comparable performance without reliance on prior phenotypic information. To further benchmark performance, we compared EpiCop-based clustering with four other existing approaches relevant for stratifying variants from T2D or asthma. These approaches cluster variants using 1. Tissue-specific open chromatin 31 , 2. Disease-specific epigenomic information 28 , 3. Joint characterisation of trait and tissue-level epigenomes 46 , and 4. Latent representations of summary statistics of 2,138 UKB phenotypes 45 (Figure 5B ). The results showed that EpiCops outperformed or matched these approaches in terms of enrichment strength across non-redundant disease-relevant traits ( Supplementary Table 1 for trait descriptions). Importantly, this performance is achieved without reliance on context-specific genomic annotations or phenotypic priors, demonstrating that EpiCops can resolve the genetic architecture of complex diseases without prior disease-specific knowledge. Finally, we assessed the robustness of EpiCop-derived clusters across different clustering algorithms. Cluster assignments were largely preserved across different clustering algorithms (k-means, hierarchical, and Leiden), with high global agreement when the number of clusters was matched ( Supplementary Figure 10A ). To further evaluate stability, we compared clustering outcomes using an alternative set of EpiCops derived from LD-VAE. Across clustering resolutions, RBM-derived EpiCops consistently yielded more compact clusters with superior cluster quality as measured by average Silhouette scores ( Supplementary Figures 10B and 10C ). Furthermore, both RBM and LD-VAE-derived EpiCops showed comparable capacity to enrich cardiometabolic traits (Supplementary Figure 10D ). Taken together, these results demonstrate that EpiCop-derived variant clustering is robust across clustering algorithms and feature extraction frameworks, highlighting the capacity of EpiCops to capture consistent epigenomic structure underlying T2D heterogeneity, independent of algorithmic variations. 

EpiCops identify variant clusters predictive of opposing cardiovascular outcomes in T2D 

Investigating further EpiCop-derived clusters for their cardiometabolic relevance in T2D, we identified variant clusters associated with markedly divergent profiles across multiple trait domains ( Figure 6A ). Clusters 10 was characterised by reduced cardiovascular risk, reflected by lower coronary heart disease (CHD), myocardial infarction (MI), and atherogenic lipid profiles, with increased high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and liver fat, while cluster 47 showed the opposite pattern with enrichment for adverse cardiac outcomes. Using partitioned polygenic risk score (pPRS) analysis, we observed consistent phenotypic differences at the individual level (Figure 6B ), demonstrating that EpiCop-informed variant clusters can predict distinct cardiometabolic outcomes in individuals with T2D. We next examined the underlying tissue-level epigenomic signals to interpret these divergent effects. Variants in cluster 10 showed strong liver-associated regulatory activity, marked by elevated H3K4me1 at rs3747207 and rs429358 ( Supplementary Figure 11A ). These variants are located in PNPLA3 and APOE gene loci respectively, both are well-established regulators of hepatic lipid metabolism and implicated in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) 78 . Epigenetic perturbation at these loci is known to promote hepatic lipid accumulation while reducing circulating lipids, subsequently contributing to decreased cardiovascular risk 79 .This provides a mechanistic basis for the paradoxical phenotypic observations (increased liver fat with decreased cardiovascular risk) in cluster 10. In contrast, cluster 47 variants showed markedly increased H3K27me3 in pancreas and cardiac tissues ( Supplementary Figure 11B ), suggesting their role in increased adverse cardiovascular outcomes. To assess the clinical relevance of these variant sets, we performed Cox regression analyses of time-to-event for major cardiac events. Individuals stratified by cluster-specific variant sets showed significantly divergent outcomes, with cluster 10 associated with a reduced incidence of cardiac events compared to cluster 47 over time (p=0.001, Figure 6C ). These findings demonstrate the translational potential of EpiCop-derived variant sets as genetic predictors of distinct cardiovascular outcomes in T2D individuals. 

Validation of cardiometabolic outcomes in an independent cohort 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

To validate the reproducibility of our findings, we tested phenotypic associations of EpiCop-derived clusters in an independent large-scale cohort encompassing genetic data from over 240k individuals (All of Us, AoU) 80 .Using pPRS models incorporating EpiCop-derived clusters, we observed strong concordance in cluster-level effect sizes across multiple cardiometabolic traits between UKB and AoU, for both continuous ( Supplementary Figure 12A ) and binary traits ( Supplementary Figure 12B ). These results indicate that variants sets defined in one cohort (UKB) recapitulate consistent phenotypic effects in an independent population, highlighting the robustness of EpiCop-derived variant clustering. Looking at cluster 10 variants closely, we found high concordance in effect size estimates across cohorts for significantly associated cardiometabolic traits ( Figure 6D ). At the individual level, pPRS derived from cluster 10 variants reproduced consistent directional effects in AoU individuals ( Figure 6E ), including increased liver fat-related traits and favourable lipid profiles. These analyses demonstrate that the phenotypic signatures captured by EpiCops are not cohort-specific but reflect reproducible biological signals. Collectively, this cross-cohort validation demonstrates the capacity of EpiCops to identify biologically robust variant sets with consistent effects across populations, supporting their utility as a genetically informed framework for resolving disease heterogeneity and enabling scalable, population-level stratification of cardiovascular risk in T2D. 

Discussion 

Resolving disease heterogeneity is essential for understanding the biological mechanisms of complex disease, yet existing frameworks remain constrained in two key respects: phenotype-based approaches capture downstream manifestations rather than underlying biology, while genetic approaches typically rely on aggregate risk models that obscure tissue and cell type-specific regulatory mechanisms. In this study, we address these critical limitations by introducing EpiCops, a generalisable framework that clusters disease-associated variants into biologically meaningful subgroups defined by cell type-specific epigenomic patterns. A central advance of this work is the demonstration that epigenomic patterning can dissect heterogeneity within complex disease without reliance on prior phenotypic information. EpiCops partitioned T2D-associated variants into clusters associated with distinct cardiometabolic profiles spanning multiple organ systems, including clusters linked to divergent cardiovascular risk that are often obscured in conventional aggregate analyses. Importantly, despite operating in an unsupervised manner, EpiCops yield strong biological concordance and perform comparably or better than state-of-the-art benchmarking frameworks that require prior phenotypic or disease-specific genomic information. These findings indicate that EpiCops capture generalisable regulatory information that enables effective stratification of disease-associated variants into biologically meaningful subgroups. Another key strength of EpiCops is their interpretability, driven by the simplicity of the RBM model architecture. In contrast to multi-layered structures that yield opaque latent representations, the single-layered RBM enables direct mapping of EpiCops to tissue and cell type contexts, facilitating interpretation of multi-organ epigenomic contributions to disease processes. Furthermore, the consistency of EpiCops across alternative modelling approaches indicates that these signatures are biologically robust and largely model-independent. Beyond descriptive annotation, EpiCops function as predictive units to classify regulatory elements, improve fine-mapping of causal variants, and model substructures within polygenic disease risk. Importantly, integration of EpiCop-derived cluster information enables stratification of T2D patients into groups with distinct cardiovascular risk profiles. These findings underscore the translational potential of EpiCops as genomic features for predicting clinically relevant outcomes in complex disease, achieved without reliance on disease-specific information. Several limitations warrant consideration. First, biological coverage of EpiCops is inherently constrained by the scope of epigenomic profiles represented in the EpiMap consortium dataset. As a result, application to more specialised contexts (e.g. rare diseases) may yield reduced interpretability where relevant epigenomic states are underrepresented. Second, while the use of 1 kb genomic windows is consistent with contemporary approaches for variant annotation 81 , the current framework does not account for linkage disequilibrium (LD) structure. Therefore, careful pre-selection of variants is necessary to avoid inflated signals. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Future work integrating EpiCops with complementary approaches will further enhance their ability to resolve disease mechanisms. For example, coupling EpiCops with variant-level information may enable more precise identification of causal pathways and therapeutic targets for disease. Given generalisability of EpiCops across diverse biological contexts, an additional direction would be their incorporation as plug-in-features within existing ML frameworks, including foundation models which have largely focused on transcriptomic representations 40, 41 or limited to specific epigenomic modality such as open chromatin 43 .Taken together, our study establishes EpiCops as generalisable epigenomic patterns that are broadly applicable for deconvoluting complex biology, including genomic regulatory elements, complex traits and disease, without reliance on context-specific information. Critically, their ability to resolve aggregate genetic risk into mechanistically interpretable regulatory programs provides a foundation for translational applications, enabling more precise and targeted interventions for complex disease. 

Methods 

Datasets 

ChIP-Sequencing data from Epimap consortium were used to extract patterns of multiple epigenetic marks in the human genome 31 . These include DNase I hypersensitivity and 7 different histone tail modifications including H3K4me3, H3K27me3, H3K4me1, H3K27ac, H3K9ac, H3K9me3 and H3K36me3. All available bigWig files were used, including partially imputed epigenetic signals from diverse cellular contexts (https://epigenome.wustl.edu/epimap/data/imputed/). We used 833 QC-passed samples only as demonstrated previously 31 .These bigwig data were converted to bedgraph format using bigWigToBedGraph program from UCSC executable download page (http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/admin/exe/), with the default parameters. Narrow peaks for H3K4me3, H3K27ac, H3K9ac, and DNase hypersensitivity were called using MACS3's callpeak function, whereas broad peaks for H3K4me1, H3K27me3, H3K9me3, and H3K36me3 were called using bdgbroadcall function 82 . This differential peak-calling strategy ensures capturing of the distinct genomic distributions of epigenetic marks, as previously described 83 .To assess sample specificity, we counted the number of samples in which peaks for a given epigenetic mark were observed within 1 kb genomic windows. We then calculated the proportion of samples exhibiting peaks relative to the total number of samples. Similarly, we computed the proportion of peaks within each window relative to the total number of peaks for that epigenetic mark. These proportions were interpolated into a single plot to compare sample specificity across epigenetic marks at 1 kb resolution. We evaluated enrichment of peaks at FANTOM5 robust enhancers, long non-coding RNAs 53 transcription start sites (TSSs) of RefSeq protein-coding genes (PCGs) by calculating fold enrichment relative to 20,000 randomly selected genomic peaks. Fold enrichment was computed independently for each sample and each epigenetic mark. 

Identifying epigenomic patterns using Restricted Boltzmann Machine 

To extract EpiCops, we trained Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) models. The training was performed independently for each of the 8 epigenetic marks. We prepared the input data to each model as a binary matrix 

𝑀 ∈ {0,1} ~".$" % × ( , where each row corresponds to a non-overlapping 1 kb genomic window (i.e. ~2.72 million windows in the hg19 genome where ChIP-seq peaks were observed from any samples) and each column represents one EpiMap sample. A value of 1 indicates the presence (i.e. at least 1bp overlap) of the epigenetic mark in a given genomic window for an epigenetic mark. To train each RBM, we performed a grid search over key hyperparameters, including learning rate (ranging 0.01-0.8), number of training iterations (ranging 10-200), and 10 random initialization states. For each combination, we trained RBMs with varying hidden layer sizes (ranging 5-100 nodes) and evaluated the generalisation error measured by the model’s log-likelihood through 5-fold cross-validation to obtain an optimal model. Essentially, each learned epigenomic pattern corresponds to a hidden node in the RBM and is represented 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

by a vector of weights for input samples. This process resulted in 8 RBM separate models, where each model captures latent epigenomic patterns or EpiCops of the epigenetic mark. 

Genome-wide distribution of EpiCops 

We performed matrix multiplication to identify genomic regions that are associated with EpiCops. For a given epigenetic mark, let 𝑊 ∈ 𝑅 ) × ( be a weight matrix where each row represents an EpiCop and each column represents an EpiMap sample, with 𝑓 and 𝑦 representing the total numbers of EpiCops and EpiMap samples for that epigenetic mark, respectively. We first converted the binary raw data 𝑀 into a genome-wide EpiCop matrix 

𝑃 ∈ 𝑅 * × ) , where x represents the total number of genomic regions. This matrix represents continuous EpiCop values indicating the strength of connection between genomic regions and EpiCops. To determine the association probabilistically, we applied a sigmoid function with a threshold of 0.5. Genomic regions with a probability above 0.5 were defined as being positively associated with a given EpiCop. This generates a genome-wide association matrix 𝐴 that represents association of i-th genomic locus with j-th EpiCop. 

𝑃 +, = / 𝑀 +-𝑊 .-, 

> (
> -/0

𝐴 +, = 00, 𝑖𝑓 11 + 𝑒 12!" ≤ 0.5 1, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒 

To analyse the genomic overlap between EpiCops, we first counted the number of 1kb windows co-occupied by a given pair of i-th ( 𝐴 +) and j-th EpiCops ( 𝐴 ,). Then the Jaccard similarity index between this pair ( 𝐽 +,,) is defined as follows. 

𝐽 +,, = ?𝐴 + ∩ 𝐴 ,??𝐴 + ∪ 𝐴 ,?

To perform pairwise comparisons of EpiCops, we computed cosine similarity for all EpiCop pairs using the cosine_similarity function from Python's sklearn package. The weights from optimal RBM models across all 8 epigenetic marks were combined into a single matrix and z-scores normalized for each EpiCop were calculated. With this matrix, cosine similarity was calculated for each pair, with only values present in both EpiCops. To extract EpiCop values for a given set of loci, we first concatenated the individual EpiCop matrices from the eight epigenetic marks into a single matrix. During concatenation, genomic loci lacking EpiCop values for a specific mark (e.g., due to absence of peaks at those loci) were imputed with zeros. The combined matrix was then normalised using z-scores. This concatenated matrix represents the continuous values of 720 EpiCops across genome-wide 1 kb windows. Genomic overlaps between input loci and EpiCop windows were assessed using bedtools intersect 84 . Loci were considered overlapping if at least one base pair overlapped. When a locus overlapped multiple EpiCop windows, it was assigned to the window with the greatest base-pair overlap. To calculate tissue-level EpiCop values, we computed the average EpiCop z-score within each tissue group as defined by the EpiMap sample description 31 . For heatmap and UMAP visualisation, values were normalised across tissue groups for each EpiCop. Missing tissue-level values were imputed using the median value of the corresponding EpiCop. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Identifying informative patterns in the input data 

We identified informative patterns in the input dataset by performing singular value decomposition (SVD). The rationale is that EpiCops contributing more significantly to overall epigenetic variance in the data are likely to be more informative than ones contributing less. For a given epigenetic mark, let 𝑍 ∈ 𝑅 * ×) be a data matrix representing z-scores of EpiCop matrix 𝑃 at x genomic regions for f EpiCops. The SVD of the EpiCop matrix yields right eigenvectors of the covariance matrix 𝑉 . that represent variance in the data explained by each EpiCop across the genomic regions. By summing up absolute values of the right eigenvectors, we calculated a contribution of i-th EpiCop ( 𝐶 +) to explain r % of total variance in the input data. We used 𝑟 = 95 (i.e. 95% of the variance) unless specified otherwise. This quantification allowed us to rank and select patterns by each EpiCop’s contribution to variance in the genome. We chose the top m number of EpiCops ( 𝑇 4 ) by this quantification. For the characterization of PCGs, we selected the top 10 informative patterns for each epigenetic mark. 

𝑍 = 𝑈 Σ𝑉 . as SVD 

𝑓 5 = 𝑎𝑟𝑔 min  

> )

N/ 𝛼 - ≥ 𝑟 100 

> )
> -/0

Q

Where 𝛼 - represents the variance explained by k-th principal component 

𝐶 + = ∑ 𝑉 +- 

> ")#
> -/0

for i-th EpiCop 

𝑇 4 = S𝐶 +$ , 𝐶 +% , … , 𝐶 +& U where 𝐶 +$ ≥ 𝐶 +% ≥ ⋯ ≥ 𝐶 +& ≥ ⋯ ≥ 𝐶 +'

Functional characterisation of EpiCops using gene ontology (GO) and KEGG pathway terms 

To characterise the functional scope captured by EpiCops, we first extracted protein-coding genes (PCGs) annotated with NM or XM RefSeq identifiers 56 . For each PCG, a 1 kb window was defined by extending 500 bp upstream and downstream of the transcription start site (TSS). Using a sigmoid activation function with a threshold of 0.5, we determined EpiCop associations across all PCGs. For each epigenetic mark, the 10 most informative EpiCops were selected (see Identifying informative patterns in the input data). Within each epigenetic mark, a unique combination of these selected EpiCops was assigned to each PCG, generating groups of genes sharing distinct epigenomic patterns for that mark. This resulted in multiple pattern combinations per epigenetic mark. Only groups containing at least 10 genes were retained for downstream analysis. GO and KEGG enrichment analyses were performed for each PCG group using the g:Profiler Python package with default settings (one-sided Fisher’s exact test with Benjamini–Hochberg FDR correction) 85 . Enrichment analysis was conducted independently for each epigenetic mark to enable cross-mark comparison. GO and KEGG terms with FDR < 0.05 were considered significant. For each epigenetic mark, we quantified the total number of non-redundant significant terms and identified terms shared across multiple pattern combinations, either within the same mark or across different marks. To assess term specificity, we calculated the proportion of EpiCop combinations associated with each enriched term. Lower proportions indicate greater specificity of a term to particular pattern combinations. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Deep learning models for EpiCop-based genomic region classification 

We extracted 49,662 enhancers across 51 in vivo tissue and cell types from EnhancerAtlas2.0 data resource. We also identified 2,386 pathogenic SNPs annotated as “Likely_pathogenic” or “Pathogenic/Likely_pathogenic” under the CLNSIG field, restricting the analysis to diseases with at least 100 pathogenic SNPs. To reduce complexity in downstream analyses, we retained only enhancers and pathogenic loci associated with a single annotation. We used deep neural network (DNN) models to predict associations between genomic regions based on their underlying epigenomic patterns. To identify optimal hyperparameters, we trained 10 DNN models with randomly sampled configurations. The hyperparameter search space included 4–8 hidden layers and 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, or 512 nodes per layer. Input data were represented as a pattern matrix 𝑃 ∈ 𝑅 * × $"6 , where x denotes the number of genomic regions and the 720 columns correspond to individual EpiCops derived from eight epigenetic marks. Each region was labelled as positive or control for binary classification. The dataset was split into training and test sets at an 80:20 ratio, and missing values were imputed using the median. To address class imbalance, the synthetic minority over-sampling technique (SMOTE) was applied to the training set only 86 .Values were then normalized using z-scores. To improve generalisation, we added an L2 ridge regularisation (𝜆 = 0.001 ) and a dropout layer (with a probability of drop-out=0.5) applied to each hidden layer. Model performance was evaluated on the test set, and the configuration achieving the highest area under the ROC curve (AUC) was selected as optimal. Hidden layers used ReLU activation, the output layer used sigmoid activation, and models were trained with the Adam optimiser and binary cross-entropy loss (or categorical cross-entropy for multi-class classification tasks). 

Transcription factor motif enrichment in epigenomic patterns 

To identify enriched transcription factor (TF) motifs within genomic regions marked by epigenomic patterns, we used the Homer motif analysis tool (http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/motif/). The “scanMotifGenomeWide.pl” program was run with default parameters to assess genome-wide enrichment for 450 TF motifs provided by Homor TF motif database. For each TF, only the top 10% of loci ranked by enrichment score were retained for downstream analysis. By intersecting these loci with EpiCops, we quantified the number of enriched TF motifs within 1 kb genomic windows. Motif enrichment for each of the 720 individual EpiCops was evaluated using Fisher’s exact test, comparing the proportion of motif-containing regions within a given pattern to all other genomic regions. Two-tailed p-values were calculated, and multiple testing correction was performed using the Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) method. TF motifs with FDR < 0.05 were considered significantly enriched, and fold change (FC) values were recorded for each pattern. To assess tissue specificity, we computed a weighted average of fold changes across EpiMap tissue groups. Weights were defined as the average pattern enrichment z-score within each tissue group, and only patterns with an average z-score > 2 were included. This yielded a single enrichment score for each TF motif in each tissue group. The top two tissue groups per TF were then identified based on this enrichment score. 

DNN models to predict cell-type specific lncRNAs 

We utilised GTEx expression data (v8, RNASeQCv1.1.9) 69 consisting of 17,832 biological samples across 54 human tissues or cell types (hereafter, "cell-type") as defined by the SMTSD column in the sample annotation file. We also obtained lists of PCGs and lncRNAs from the latest GENCODE annotations (gencode.v47lift37.basic.annotation.gtf and gencode.v46lift37.long_noncoding_RNAs.gtf, respectively) 87 . For each cell type, we conducted differential expression (DE) analysis using a linear regression model with ordinary least squares 88 after log-transforming TPM values. This analysis aimed to identify up-regulated PCGs and lncRNAs (defined by FDR<0.05 and log2FC>1) specific to each cell-type. Subsequently, we trained a DNN model for each cell-type utilising epigenomic patterns from cell-type-specific PCGs as positive dataset and 5,000 randomly selected genomic loci as negative dataset. Following the model optimisation, we tested the trained models on their capacity to identify cell-type-specific lncRNAs from an additional set of 5,000 random genomic loci. Only PCGs containing more than 50% of 720 epigenomic patterns were used in training, and only 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

patterns that significantly differed from the control dataset and appeared in over 50% of PCGs were included for the training. Model performance was evaluated using the area under the curve (AUC) metric. 

Analysing genome-wide EpiCops using principal component analysis 

To reduce dimensionality and identify genome-wide co-modulated epigenetic profiles, we applied principal component analysis (PCA) to the genome-wide EpiCop matrix. EpiCop values were extracted for the regions of interest and normalised using z-scores. PCA was then performed, and the cumulative explained variance plot was used to determine the minimum number of principal components (PCs) required to capture at least 95% of the total variance. Each PC represents a unique linear combination of EpiCops derived from the 8 epigenetic marks across diverse organ, tissue and cell types, corresponding to an axis of variance in the data. To calculate specificity of PCs, we first calculated average EpiCop weights for each group of interest. Note this group can be tissue or trait. Let 𝑦 and 𝑇 be the total numbers of samples and groups respectively. If we let 𝑊 +

be a vector for EpiCop weights for sample 𝑖 , where 𝑖 = 1,2, … , 𝑦 , then a set of samples belonging to a group 𝑡 

can be written as 𝐺 7 = {𝑖 ∈ {1, … , 𝑦} | 𝑔 + = 𝑡} ,where 𝑔 + ∈ {1,2, … , 𝑇} , a group assignment for sample 𝑖 . Then the average EpiCop weight for a group 𝑡 is 𝑊 [7 = 0 

> |9 (|

∑ 𝑊 ++∈9( . For weight values that are not observed, median values were imputed. Subsequently, group averages were normalised using the z-score. Let this resultant weight matrix be 𝑀 where rows are 720 EpiCops and columns are groups, 𝑀 ∈ 𝑅 $"6 ∗.. Similarly, let PC loading matrix be 𝑃 ∈ 𝑅 $"6 ∗<, where 𝐾 represents the number of PCs (i.e. 81 PCs for the whole genome). By marginalising over the 720 EpiCops (i.e. combining weights per group using PC loading), we obtain a specificity matrix 𝑆 ,where 𝑆 = 𝑃 . ∙ 𝑀 . Therefore, in this matrix, 𝑆 -,, quantifies the contribution of k-th PC in group j, capturing how strongly each PC is associated with each group of interest by projecting the 720 EpiCops through the PC space. 

Composite data analysis 

In composite data analysis, we aimed to test capacity of epigenomic patterns to accurately segregate genomic loci of distinct biological contexts. To this end, we first merged genomic loci of mixed biology as input. Five different data resources were analysed; 1. Five tissue-specific groups of enhancers (lung, cerebellum, liver, left ventricle and pancreas) from EnhancerAtlas 2.0 57 , 2. Fourteen disease groups from Global Biobank Meta-analysis Initiative data (asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, heart failure, stroke, gout, venous thromboembolism, primary open-angle glaucoma, abdominal aortic aneurysm, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, thyroid cancer, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, uterine cancer, acute appendicitis, and appendectomy) 68 , 3. Seventy-hive UK Biobank GWAS traits including blood/immune, brain/neuronal, heart/cardiovascular, lung/respiratory and metabolic traits 2, and 4. Five groups of tissue-specific GTEx eQTLs (heart left ventricle, thyroid, kidney cortex, brain cortex, muscle skeletal) 69 . Subsequently, for each data resource, we clustered variants based on EpiCop values in those variants. We assessed EpiCop-based clustering by comparing adjusted rand index (ARI) value against a null distribution generated from 1,000 random permutations. For EnhancerAtlas and GTEx eQTL dataset, we also assessed statistical significance for a given trait within a given EpiCop by comparing to the corresponding random distribution (Wilcoxon-ranksum test, two-sided, FDR-Benjamini Hochberg). For composite disease analysis, phenotypes were generated by combining two distinct phenotypes into a single cohort as described previously 89 . Composite phenotypes were comprised of asthma and gout, asthma and COPD, asthma and high blood pressure (hypertension), or Type-1 diabetes and Type-2 diabetes. For each composite disease pair, the cohort in the UKBB was randomly split into a testing and training cohort across 10 permutations. For each permutation, we conducted a GWAS of the composite phenotype in the training cohort, using age, sex, Townsend deprivation factor and the first 10 principal components as covariates. Performance was evaluated for the top 100, 250, 500 and 1000 most significant, independent variants associated with the composite phenotype. We iteratively trained models with varying parameters and selected an optimal model based on R-squared value. Subsequently, we clustered variants using EpiCops using UnTangled consensus clustering method. We selected 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

lead variants considering linkage disequilibrium (LD) structure, using a clumping process using p-value threshold (5 ∗ 10 1=)69 . Only genomic loci uniquely associated with a single group was included for clustering analysis. For asthma and gout composite data, we first chose significant variant clusters (p-value < 0.05). Based on the value of test coefficient, we assigned each cluster to either asthma (negative test coefficients) or gout (positive test coefficients) group. Any variants not assigned to either of the groups are annotated as ‘Shared’. For tissue-level patterns in each disease, we converted EpiCop values of all variants in that disease group to average tissue scores and rescaled the output using min-max normalisation (0 as the minimum and 1 as the maximum). This calculation created a separate matrix for each disease where rows are epigenetic marks and columns are tissue types. By subtracting these two matrices, we obtained disease specific score between asthma and gout, where direction of the output indicates preference towards a disease (i.e. gout for positive values, asthma for negative values). Partitioned PRS were calculated for each EpiCop derived variant cluster as a weighted sum of variant effect sizes estimated from the GWAS conducted in the training cohort for each composite phenotype. An unpartitioned PRS containing all variants partitioned by EpiCop was used to evaluate performance. All PRS were standardised to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. Within the case cohort of each composite cohort, all cluster-partitioned PRS were jointly fit against the true phenotype status of each individual to obtain the proportion of subtype variance captured (Nagelkerke’s R 2). The proportion of variance explained by a null model fitting only covariates (first 10 PCs, age, sex, and Townsend deprivation index), was used to estimate the gain in R 2. To obtain error size estimates, this analysis was repeated across 10 permutations of training-testing cohorts. 

Clustering of genomic loci using EpiCops 

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) genome-wide significant variants were selected from a published data 14 with 643 SNPs included after filtering for overlap with available genomic annotations. For asthma, 419 SNPs were included after filtering 28 .To perform clustering of genomic loci, we adopted a consensus clustering approach as previously described 67 .Note we modified parameters of this method, so that it fits better for our data. For instance, to reduce dimensionality of data, rather than using top 10 principal components, we used selected patterns (by median absolute deviation value above 50 th percentile) to calculate k-nearest neighbours (k=15) in UMAP dimensions, using Euclidean distance. Subsequently, we performed Leiden community-based clustering with 100 different resolutions ranging from 0.2 to 20. By counting the number of times any pairs of genomic loci clustered to the same group, we created a consensus matrix. Linkage matrix was created with the corresponding distance matrix (calculated as 100 - consensus matrix), with Euclidean distance and Ward method. We iteratively performed hierarchical clustering with a varying number of clusters ranging from 2 to 300. At each iteration, we calculated a Silhouette score to quantify distinctiveness of variant clusters. By plotting a series of Silhouette scores, we found an optimal number of clusters at the minimum number of clusters where the average of preceding 5 Silhouette scores does not improve more than 0.001 - which effectively marked the start of plateau in many cases. Finally, clusters with less than 10 loci were removed. To assess enrichment of phenotypes among variant clusters compared to random association, we created a null distribution of enrichment derived from 1,000 random shuffling permutations. We calculated proportions of variants associated with a given phenotype in each cluster, so that the sum of the proportions of that phenotype across clusters is 1. Subsequently, z-scores of the proportion were used to identify significantly enriched cluster-phenotype pairs (FDR<0.05, two-sided z-test). In addition, we adopted adjusted rand index (ARI) 90 to assess the overall clustering agreement by comparing against ground-truth of their associations if known (e.g. tissue-type specific enhancers). To calculate statistical significance, ARI values derived from 1,000 random shuffling permutations were used as the null distribution with an assumption of normal distribution (t-test, two-sided). 

Summary statistics-based cluster association with phenome 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

For T2D, we assembled a panel of clinically and biologically relevant traits spanning: (1) glucose homeostasis (2) anthropometric measures; (3) blood biomarkers; (4) lipid metabolism; (5) liver function (6) renal function; and (7) cardiovascular traits. For asthma, the phenotype panel included (1) blood biomarkers; (2) immune cell populations; (3) respiratory function measures; and (4) asthma subtypes. GWAS summary statistics for these phenotypes were obtained from multiple consortia including UK Biobank, MAGIC, GIANT, and GWAS catalogues 2, 91-93 . All GWAS summary statistics were harmonised such that effect alleles were aligned to the disease risk-increasing direction. For T2D, effect alleles were oriented to match the T2D risk allele from the reference GWAS 15 . For asthma, effects were similarly aligned to the asthma risk allele from Stikker et al. 28 .To assess enrichment of phenotypes among variant clusters compared to random association, we created a null distribution of enrichment derived from 1,000 random shuffling permutations. We calculated proportions of variants associated with a given phenotype in each cluster, so that the sum of the proportions of that phenotype across clusters is 1. Subsequently, z-scores of the proportion were used to identify significantly enriched cluster-phenotype pairs (FDR<0.05, two-sided z-test). In addition, we adopted adjusted rand index (ARI) 90 to assess the overall clustering agreement by comparing against ground-truth of their associations if known (e.g. tissue-type specific enhancers). To calculate statistical significance, ARI values derived from 1,000 random shuffling permutations were used as the null distribution with an assumption of normal distribution (t-test, two-sided). For each EpiCop cluster and phenotype, we aggregated variant-level GWAS effect estimates using inverse-variance weighted fixed-effects meta-analysis. This approach weights each variant by the precision of its effect estimate. The resulting summary estimate was defined as the aggregated effect size (AES) which represents the overall direction and magnitude of association between variants in a given cluster and the phenotype. We also included an all variant set containing all disease-associated variants as a control. Statistical significance was derived using two-tailed z-tests derived from the meta-analysis models with multiple testing performed. Only non-redundant phenotypes were retained for enrichment analysis. Cluster–phenotype tests were excluded when no variants from the cluster overlapped the corresponding GWAS summary statistics file. 

Functional Correlation between variant clusters 

To quantify the distinctiveness of each cluster's phenotype association profile relative to the global average, we calculated deviation scores. For each phenotype k and cluster j, the deviation was computed as: 𝐷 ,- = 𝐴𝐸 𝑆 ,- −

𝐴𝐸 𝑆 6-, where 𝐴𝐸 𝑆 ,- is the aggregated effect size for cluster 𝑗 on phenotype 𝑘 , and 𝐴𝐸 𝑆 6- is the aggregated effect size for the all variant whole genome control on phenotype 𝑘 . The deviation profile for cluster 𝑗 can therefore be written as 𝐃 , = (𝐷 ,0, 𝐷 ,", … , 𝐷 ,< ).For each Smith-defined T2D cluster 𝑥 and each EpiCop-defined T2D cluster 𝑦 , the functional similarity was then quantified using Spearman correlation between their deviation profiles 𝜌 = cor >?@ABCAD (𝐃 *

> >CEFG

, 𝐃 (

> H?EIJ?

). Smith-defined T2D clusters and every EpiCop-defined T2D clusters. 

UK Biobank and All of US individual-level analyses 

Population cohorts 

UK Biobank 2 is a prospective population-based cohort of approximately 500,000 UK participants recruited at ages 40–69, with linked genetic, lifestyle, biomarker, hospital, primary care, medication, and mortality data. All of Us 94 is a US-based population-based cohort integrating participant surveys, physical measurements, electronic health records, wearable-device data, and genomic data; the v8 release includes genomic data for more than 447,000 participants with array genotypes and more than 414,000 with short-read whole-genome sequencing. 

Genotype pre-processing 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

UK Biobank imputed genotype data were processed using plink2 95 . Individual-level genotypes were restricted to biallelic variants with minor allele frequency (MAF) < 0.01, Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium P < 1×10⁻⁶, or imputation quality score (INFO) < 0.7. After quality control, genotype data from chromosomes 1-22 were merged across all autosomes. The merged genotype dataset was restricted to European unrelated individuals. We used All of Us ACAF-threshold genotype from v8 release. Genotypes were pre-processed using plink2, 

restricted to biallelic variants, and filtered to retain unrelated European-ancestry individuals. 

Cohort and covariates definitions 

Type 2 diabetes cases were defined using the eMERGE Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus phenotype algorithm 96 , which classifies cases based on combinations of T2D ICD9/10 diagnosis codes diabetes medication exposures, and supporting laboratory evidence, while excluding individuals with type 1 diabetes diagnosis codes. Controls were defined as participants with no diabetes-related diagnostic, self-report, medication, insulin, or laboratory evidence. Asthma cases were defined as individuals with ICD9/10 diagnosis codes as well as those with self-reported asthma. Controls were defined as individuals without any asthma-related diagnosis codes. Controls were defined as participants with no asthma-related diagnosis codes and no self-reported asthma. Individuals with allergic or asthma-related conditions were excluded from the controls. Covariates used include age, sex, Townsend deprivation index, the first 10 genetic principal components, disease tatus where relevant, and trait-specific medication covariates. Medication covariates included lipid medication for lipid traits, glucose medication for glycaemic traits, and hypertension medication for blood pressure traits. 

Polygenic risk score calculation 

T2D and asthma genome wide significant variants from Smith et al. and Stikker et al. were matched to variants in the UK Biobank imputation array. Variants not directly available were matched with LD proxies (r² > 0.7) using 1000 Genomes Project phase 3 European reference genotype 97 Variant weights were additionally mapped to independent, non-UK Biobank GWAS cohorts to enable out-of-sample prediction using 68, 98 .Baseline whole genome polygenic risk scores was calculated using all disease-associated variants weighted by their marginal GWAS effect sizes. For individual 𝑖 , the whole-genome PRS was defined as: 

PRS + 

> KL

= / 𝐺 +4 𝛽 4

> %
> 4/0

where 𝐺 +4 ∈ {0,1,2} is the effect-allele dosage for variant 𝑚 , 𝛽 4is the GWAS effect size, and 𝑀 is the number of disease-associated variants Cluster partitioned PRS were calculated separately for each epigenomic cluster using only variants assigned to that cluster, weighted by their GWAS effect sizes using plink. For each epigenomic cluster 𝑗 , the cluster-partitioned PRS was defined as: 

PRS + 

> (,)

= / 𝐺 +4 𝛽 4

> 4∈O"

where 𝐶 , is the set of variants assigned to EpiCop cluster 𝑗 . All PRS were standardised before downstream modelling. 

PRS model evaluation and association testing 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Logistic and linear models were used respectively for binary and continuous phenotypes. Covariates include age at assessment, sex, the first 10 genetic principal components, Townsend Deprivation Index, disease-relevant medication use, and baseline disease status. UKB analyses used train/test splits generated from the case-control cohort. For each split, PRS values were merged with covariates and phenotypes, and analyses were run separately for T2D-only participants and the full cohort with or without T2D status included as a covariate. For each phenotype, three models were evaluated: 

𝑀 6: 𝑌 + ∼ 𝐂 +

𝑀 KL : 𝑌 + ∼ PRS + 

> KL

+ 𝐂 +

𝑀 IPQRF@B : 𝑌 + ∼ / PRS +,  

> (,)

+ 𝐂 +

> <
> ,/0

where 𝑌 +is the phenotype for individual 𝑖 , 𝐂 +is the covariate vector, PRS +

> KL

is the whole-genome or all-variant disease PRS, and PRS +,  

> (,)

is the PRS for EpiCop cluster 𝑗 . Binary outcomes were modelled using logistic regression and evaluated using Nagelkerke’s pseudo-𝑅 " . Continuous outcomes were modelled using linear regression and evaluated using 𝑅 ". Models were fit in the training set and evaluated in the test set by regressing the observed phenotype on the model prediction. The incremental variance explained by whole-genome and cluster-partitioned PRS was calculated as: 

Δ𝑅 KL  

> "

= 𝑅 "(𝑀 KL ) − 𝑅 "(𝑀 6)

Δ𝑅 IPQRF@B  

> "

= 𝑅 "(𝑀 IPQRF@B ) − 𝑅 "(𝑀 6)Δ𝑅 IPQRF@B 1KL  

> "

= 𝑅 "(𝑀 IPQRF@B ) − 𝑅 "(𝑀 KL )

Permutation analyses were conducted over repeated random train/test splits to estimate the stability of model performance and the empirical distribution of 𝑅 "gains. In addition, we performed per-cluster association analyses to identify which individual EpiCop clusters were associated with specific phenotypes using the full cohort. For each phenotype, each cluster-specific PRS was tested in a separate regression model adjusted for the same covariates: 

𝑌 + ∼ PRS + 

> (,)

+ 𝐂 +

where PRS +

> (,)

is the standardised PRS for cluster 𝑗 in individual 𝑖 . For binary phenotypes, logistic regression was used with odds reported. For continuous phenotypes, linear regression was used with regression coefficients reported. 

Cardiac incidence analysis 

To test whether EpiCop-partitioned T2D genetic burden stratified cardiovascular outcomes, time-to-event analyses were performed using UKB follow-up data. Cluster-specific PRS were calculated for individual EpiCop clusters. For myocardial infarction incidence analyses, prevalent myocardial infarction was removed by excluding individuals with MI dates before recruitment. Follow-up time was calculated from recruitment to the earliest of myocardial infarction or administrative censoring. Individuals were stratified by cluster PRS quantiles. For single-cluster analyses, individuals in the top 30% and bottom 30% of the cluster-specific PRS distribution were compared. For cross-cluster analyses, discordant PRS groups were defined using clusters 10 and 47: high cluster 10 / low cluster 47, PRS +,06 ≥ 𝑄 6.$6 ,06 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

high cluster 47 / low cluster 10 , PRS +,S$ ≥ 𝑄 6.$6 ,S$ 

Cox proportional hazards models were fit as: ℎ+(𝑡 ) = ℎ6(𝑡 )exp (𝛼 𝐺 + + 𝛾 PRS + 

> KL

+ 𝜹 T𝐂 +)

where ℎ+(𝑡 )is the hazard for individual 𝑖 , ℎ6(𝑡 )is the baseline hazard, 𝐺 +is the PRS group, PRS +

> KL

is the whole-genome T2D PRS, and 𝐂 +includes age, sex, PCs 1–10, Townsend deprivation index, medication covariates, and T2D status. 

Genome-wide fine-mapping for complex traits using EpiCops 

We performed genome-wide fine-mapping (GWFM) 99 using SBayesRC 11 for 28 independent complex traits in the UK Biobank, analysing 7.4 million SNPs with various functional annotations across the genome. The traits were selected to have pairwise phenotypic correlation < 0.3 and sample size > 100,000. They span diverse categories, including blood cell counts, biomarkers, reproductive traits, behaviour traits, physical measurements, cognitive traits, and common diseases (see Supplementary Table 3 of for trait details). We conducted three GWFM analyses: 1. GWFM without any SNP annotations, 2. GWFM using 96 baseline functional annotations (from BaselineLDv2.2 100 ), and 3. GWFM using 81 PCs of epigenomic patterns. For each trait, we examined 90% local credible sets, defined as sets of SNPs with a combined posterior probability of 0.9 for containing a causal variant. To compare mapping performance across GWFM analyses with different annotations, we evaluated the average credible set size across traits - smaller sets indicate higher resolution and better prediction for causal variants. Annotations for the baseline model 2.2 was obtained from published functional priors 101 .

Consistency of phenotype association between variant clustering methods 

To assess consistency of phenotypes captured by different clustering methods and parameters, we repeated clustering of T2D variants from Smith et al. 14 using k-means, hierarchical and Leiden clustering method. Clustering parameters were tuned to generate the same number of variant clusters as obtained with the UnTangled consensus clustering method 67 (i.e. 72 clusters). Pairwise similarity between clustering results was quantified using the adjusted rand index (ARI). 

Comparison of EpiCops extracted by different feature extraction models 

To test consistency of epigenomic patterns between different extraction models, we extracted EpiCops using linear-decoded variational autoencoder (LD-VAE) 102 . A LD-VAE was trained per assay for comparison to the RBMs. The architecture was designed to closely match the RBM, using single linear layers for the encoder and decoder with ReLU activation. Latent dimensionality was fixed according to the optimised RBM hidden node count. The dataset was split by chromosome, with 8 and 10 used for validation, 9 and 11 for testing, and the rest for training. The loss composed a binary cross entropy (BCE) reconstruction objective and regularisation by KL divergence. To improve stability, learning rate used cosine annealing with linear warmup and KL divergence used linear warmup. Validation metrics were monitored to avoid overfitting, and the best epoch (by validation loss) was selected for testing/analysis. To assess the utility of EpiCops derived from each feature extraction method, we used all 720 EpiCops from each model to cluster T2D variants from Smith et al. Resolution parameters were adjusted so that both approaches produced the same number of variant clusters (i.e., 85 clusters). For comparison, we evaluated average Silhouette scores across different numbers of clusters (from 2 to 300) and compared the range of aggregated effect-size enrichment across clusters between the two methods. 

Benchmarking analysis for variant clustering 

We performed a head-to-head benchmarking analysis to compare EpiCop-derived clustering of T2D variants with existing approaches: 1. Phenotype-based clustering, as reported in Smith et al. 14 , 2. Direct epigenomic 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

annotation, using the high confidence variant set only 28 , 3. Integrative epigenomic and pleotropic modelling 46 ,using J-PEP W factorised matrix for T2D variant from Suzuki et al. 15 , 4. Tissue-specific open chromatin, using EpiMap DNase data (see below for details) 31 , 5. Large-scale genotype-phenotype decomposition 45 . Specifically, for clustering variants using J-PEP W matrix 46 , we used data for ‘All_Metal_LDSC-CORR_Neff_W’ and assigned T2D variants to a cluster with the highest score. For tissue-specific open chromatin data 31 , T2D variants were mapped to EpiMap tissue-enriched DNase-seq 1 kb windows by direct overlap or through LD proxies . We identified T2D variants from Smith et al. that overlapped with above open chromatin loci. We used only variable EpiCops defined by MAD<0.5 for variant clustering. We only kept variants clusters with at least 5 variants. As the total number of variants is small, we used Leiden clustering with a resolution leading to the same number of clusters defined by tissue-specific open chromatin patterns. For comparison, we used 22 non-redundant cardiometabolic traits. Variant clusters without any mapping variants from phenotype enrichment analysis were excluded from the benchmarking analysis. For denotype-phenotype genomic decomposition method (DeGAs) 45 , we assigned variants to a single feature (or PC) with the highest score. To this end, we first performed overlap analysis between their reported contribution variants and genome-wide EpiCop windows that overlap T2D variants from Suzuki et al. 15 . Total number of non-overlapping variants was 393. We ran Leiden clustering with a resolution of 1.0 based on DeGAs 100 PCs, which gave 7 clusters. To get the same number of clusters with EpiCops using Leiden clustering, we used a resolution of 0.7, with a random seed of 42. 

Code availability 

Scripts to perform the analysis were written with Python ver. 3.12.2 and are available at GitHub page (https://github.com/palpant-comp), which includes step-by-step tutorials to run variant clustering. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figures 

Figure 1. EpiCops represent underlying epigenomic patterns across diverse tissue and cell types . A.Schematics illustrating training of the RBM model to extract underlying epigenomic patterns (EpiCops) from consortium-scale epigenomic data covering diverse biological contexts. B. Visualisation of EpiCop weights. Each EpiCop is represented by a set of values directly mappable to EpiMap samples. C. Application of EpiCops. EpiCops can be characterised at genomic loci of interest for downstream analyses. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 2. EpiCops capture distinct tissue and cell-type specific epigenomic patterns . A. Pairwise similarity between EpiCops by cosine similarity. B. Proportion of genome coverage by EpiCops. C. Chromosomal distribution of enriched EpiCops (z > 2 compared to the genome-wide distribution). D. Proportion of functional genomic loci mappable by EpiCops. The proportion was calculated iteratively by counting the number of loci overlapped by cumulatively added EpiCops (x-axis), divided by the total number of functional loci in the dataset. Inset donut plot shows dataset coverage by the total number of loci overlapped by at least one EpiCop. E.Functional enrichment of protein-coding genes (PCGs) grouped by combinations of EpiCops within each epigenetic mark. Only significantly enriched (FDR < 0.05, Fisher’s exact test) Gene Ontology (GO) Biological Process (BP) terms were included. Shared terms between EpiCop combinations were excluded to identify unique terms within each epigenetic mark (Unique, within) or across different epigenetic marks (Unique, across). 

F. Performance of classification models trained on EpiCops to predict genomic regulatory loci of two distinct functional units; cell identity (51 tissue-type specific enhancers) and disease (variants from 22 distinct diseases). ‘Against loci of similar function’ represents classification performance against loci of the same functional unit from different biological contexts, while ‘Against random genomic loci’ represents performance against 10,000 random genomic loci. The red dashed line (AUC = 0.5) indicates random performance. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 3. EpiCops characterise underlying epigenomic patterns of complex traits across the genome. A. 

Tissue-level epigenetic signal enrichment of atrial fibrillation variants. B. Performance of fine-mapping analysis for 27 distinct GWAS traits using SBayesRC when the model is incorporated with EpiCop weights (EpiCops), functional genomic annotations (Baseline Model 2.2) or no annotations (None). Significance was calculated using two-sided Wilcoxon-ranksum test. C. Head-to-head comparison of average credible set size between the EpiCop model and the model without annotations. D. Pipeline schematic illustrating the application of EpiCops to GWAS complex traits. E. Clustering of variants from 14 distinct diseases; POAG (primary open-angle glaucoma), IPF (idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis), ThC (thyroid cancer), AcApp (acute appendicitis), HF (heart failure), UtC (uterine cancer), HCM (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy), COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), AAA (abdominal aortic aneurysm), Append (Appendicitis), VTE (Venous thromboembolism). Significance was calculated using 1,000 random permutations. F. Tissue-type specific epigenetic signals of disease variants (Asthma or Uterine cancer) extracted by EpiCops. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 4. EpiCops dissect biological heterogeneity in complex diseases. A. Schematic illustrating the analysis pipeline using EpiCops to dissect variants of distinct diseases. B. Comparison of mean R-squared values for models trained with EpiCop clustering information (EpiCops) versus without clustering information (Control), across varying numbers of disease variants. Significance level: *** (FDR<0.001), ** (FDR<0.01), * (FDR<0.05), Wilcoxon ranksum test, two-sided. C. Enrichment of EpiCops across disease variants from significantly associated clusters. Only EpiCops with a median absolute deviation (MAD) > 0.5 are shown. D.Tissue-type specific epigenetic signals distinguishing asthma and gout. The scale bar indicates the signal bias between these two disease states. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 5. EpiCops reveal distinct clusters of disease traits. A . Enrichment of 36 cardiometabolic traits across EpiCop-based clusters of Type-2-diabetes. Enrichment for each trait was calculated based on 1,000 random permutations. B. Performance of EpiCop-based clustering of disease variants compared to existing methods. Enrichment was assessed in both directions (Maximum or Minimum). Comparisons highlighted with pink shading indicates superior performance by EpiCops. P-values were computed using a two-sided Wilcoxon ranksum test. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 6. EpiCops identify variant clusters predictive of distinct cardiometabolic outcomes in individuals with T2D. A. Comparison of aggregated effect sizes for multiple cardiometabolic traits between clusters 10 and 47. Asterisk marks indicate statistical significance (FDR<0.05). Control represents outcomes for all T2D variants. B. Standardised effect size (z-score) in T2D individuals (UK Biobank), quantified by partitioned polygenic risk score derived from EpiCop-clustered variant sets. Significance level: *** (FDR<0.001), ** (FDR<0.01), * (FDR<0.05). C. Cox regression analysis for year-to-major cardiac event incidence. D.Correlation of effect sizes for cardiometabolic traits between two independent cohorts (UK Biobank and All of Us). E. Standardised effect size (z-score) in T2D individuals (All of Us) for selected cardiometabolic traits. Significance is defined as FDR<0.05 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

References 1. Ishigaki, K. et al. Large-scale genome-wide association study in a Japanese population identifies novel susceptibility loci across different diseases. Nature Genetics 52 , 669-+ (2020). 2. Sudlow, C. et al. UK Biobank: An Open Access Resource for Identifying the Causes of a Wide Range of Complex Diseases of Middle and Old Age. Plos Med 12 (2015). 3. Schwarzerova, J. et al. A perspective on genetic and polygenic risk scores-advances and limitations and overview of associated tools. Brief Bioinform 25 (2024). 4. Choi, S.W. et al. PRSet: Pathway-based polygenic risk score analyses and software. Plos Genet 19 

(2023). 5. Kullo, I.J. et al. Polygenic scores in biomedical research. Nature Reviews Genetics 23 , 524-532 (2022). 6. Thompson, M. et al. Methylation risk scores are associated with a collection of phenotypes within electronic health record systems. Npj Genom Med 7 (2022). 7. Zhang, Y. et al. An Integrative Polygenic and Epigenetic Risk Score for Overweight-Related Hypertension in Chinese Population. medRxiv , 2025.2001.2013.25320495 (2025). 8. Zhang, S. et al. Single-cell polygenic risk scores dissect cellular and molecular heterogeneity of complex human diseases. Nature Biotechnology (2025). 9. Choi, S.W. & O'Reilly, P.F. PRSice-2: Polygenic Risk Score software for biobank-scale data. 

Gigascience 8 (2019). 10. Vilhjálmsson, B.J. et al. Modeling Linkage Disequilibrium Increases Accuracy of Polygenic Risk Scores. American Journal of Human Genetics 97 , 576-592 (2015). 11. Zheng, Z.L. et al. Leveraging functional genomic annotations and genome coverage to improve polygenic prediction of complex traits within and between ancestries. Nature Genetics 56 , 767-+ (2024). 12. Orcales, F. et al. A partitioned polygenic risk score reveals distinct contributions to psoriasis clinical phenotypes across a multi-ethnic cohort. J Transl Med 22 (2024). 13. Crone, B. & Boyle, A.P. Enhancing portability of trans-ancestral polygenic risk scores through tissue-specific functional genomic data integration. Plos Genet 20 (2024). 14. Smith, K. et al. Multi-ancestry polygenic mechanisms of type 2 diabetes. Nat Med 30 , 1065-1074 (2024). 15. Suzuki, K. et al. Genetic drivers of heterogeneity in type 2 diabetes pathophysiology. Nature 627 (2024). 16. Allis, C.D. & Jenuwein, T. The molecular hallmarks of epigenetic control. Nature Reviews Genetics 17 ,487-500 (2016). 17. Corbin, J., Yu, X., Jin, J., Cai, L. & Wang, G.G. EZH2 PROTACs target EZH2- and FOXM1-associated oncogenic nodes, suppressing breast cancer cell growth. Oncogene 43 , 2722-2736 (2024). 18. Mabe, N.W., Perry, J.A., Malone, C.F. & Stegmaier, K. Pharmacological targeting of the cancer epigenome. Nat Cancer 5, 844-865 (2024). 19. Niu, N. et al. Tumor cell-intrinsic epigenetic dysregulation shapes cancer-associated fibroblasts heterogeneity to metabolically support pancreatic cancer. Cancer Cell 42 , 869-884 e869 (2024). 20. Hong, S.G. et al. Dissociation of muscle insulin sensitivity from exercise endurance in mice by HDAC3 depletion. Nat Med 23 , 223-234 (2017). 21. Rönn, T. et al. Genes with epigenetic alterations in human pancreatic islets impact mitochondrial function, insulin secretion, and type 2 diabetes. Nat Commun 14 (2023). 22. Koh, K.D. et al. Genomic characterization and therapeutic utilization of IL-13-responsive sequences in asthma. Cell Genom 3 (2023). 23. Wei, J.L. et al. Functional characterization of eQTLs and asthma risk loci with scATAC-seq across immune cell types and contexts. American Journal of Human Genetics 112 (2025). 24. Boogerd, C.J. et al. Cardiomyocyte proliferation is suppressed by ARID1A-mediated YAP inhibition during cardiac maturation. Nat Commun 14 (2023). 25. Lazaropoulos, M.P. et al. Nuclear ATP-citrate lyase regulates chromatin-dependent activation and maintenance of the myofibroblast gene program. Nat Cardiovasc Res 3 (2024). 26. Hou, L. et al. Multitissue H3K27ac profiling of GTEx samples links epigenomic variation to disease. 

Nature Genetics 55 , 1665-+ (2023). 27. Bompada, P. et al. Epigenome-Wide Histone Acetylation Changes in Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes and Atherosclerotic Disease. Biomedicines 9 (2021). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28. Stikker, B. et al. Epigenomic partitioning of a polygenic risk score for asthma reveals distinct genetically driven disease pathways. Eur Respir J 64 (2024). 29. Kundaje, A. et al. Integrative analysis of 111 reference human epigenomes. Nature 518 , 317-330 (2015). 30. Regev, A. et al. The Human Cell Atlas. Elife 6 (2017). 31. Boix, C.A., James, B.T., Park, Y.P., Meuleman, W. & Kellis, M. Regulatory genomic circuitry of human disease loci by integrative epigenomics. Nature 590 (2021). 32. Moore, J.E. et al. An expanded registry of candidate cis-regulatory elements. Nature (2026). 33. Deng, L.S. et al. Atlas of cardiac endothelial cell enhancer elements linking the mineralocorticoid receptor to pathological gene expression. Sci Adv 10 (2024). 34. Hou, L. et al. Multitissue H3K27ac profiling of GTEx samples links epigenomic variation to disease. 

Nature Genetics (2023). 35. Rozowsky, J. et al. The EN-TEx resource of multi-tissue personal epigenomes & variant-impact models. 

Cell 186 , 1493-+ (2023). 36. Mikkelsen, T.S. et al. Genome-wide maps of chromatin state in pluripotent and lineage-committed cells. 

Nature 448 , 553-U552 (2007). 37. Ernst, J. & Kellis, M. Discovery and characterization of chromatin states for systematic annotation of the human genome. Nature Biotechnology 28 , 817-U894 (2010). 38. Hoffman, M.M. et al. Unsupervised pattern discovery in human chromatin structure through genomic segmentation. Nat Methods 9, 473-U488 (2012). 39. Hon, G., Ren, B. & Wang, W. ChromaSig: A Probabilistic Approach to Finding Common Chromatin Signatures in the Human Genome. Plos Comput Biol 4 (2008). 40. Theodoris, C.V. et al. Transfer learning enables predictions in network biology. Nature (2023). 41. Cui, H.T. et al. scGPT: toward building a foundation model for single-cell multi-omics using generative AI. Nat Methods (2024). 42. Gao, Z.J., Liu, Q., Zeng, W.W., Jiang, R. & Wong, W.H. EpiGePT: a pretrained transformer-based language model for context-specific human epigenomics. Genome Biol 25 (2024). 43. Chen, X.Y. et al. EpiAgent: foundation model for single-cell epigenomics. Nat Methods 22 , 2316-2327 (2025). 44. Javed, N. et al. A multi-modal transformer for cell type-agnostic regulatory predictions. Cell Genom 5

(2025). 45. Tanigawa, Y. et al. Components of genetic associations across 2,138 phenotypes in the UK Biobank highlight adipocyte biology. Nat Commun 10 (2019). 46. Kerner, G., Kamitaki, N., Strober, B. & Price, A.L. Mapping disease loci to biological processes via joint pleiotropic and epigenomic partitioning. Cell Genom , 101138 (2026). 47. Wong, D.R., Hill, A.S. & Moccia, R. Simple controls exceed best deep learning algorithms and reveal foundation model effectiveness for predicting genetic perturbations. Bioinformatics 41 (2025). 48. Ahlmann-Eltze, C., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Deep-learning-based gene perturbation effect prediction does not yet outperform simple linear baselines. Nat Methods 22 , 1657-1661 (2025). 49. DI Sarra, G., Bravi, B. & Roudi, Y. The unbearable lightness of restricted Boltzmann machines: Theoretical insights and biological applications. Epl-Europhys Lett 149 (2025). 50. Heintzman, N.D. et al. Distinct and predictive chromatin signatures of transcriptional promoters and enhancers in the human genome. Nature Genetics 39 , 311-318 (2007). 51. Aibar, S. et al. SCENIC: single-cell regulatory network inference and clustering. Nat Methods 14 , 1083-+ (2017). 52. Ernst, J. et al. Mapping and analysis of chromatin state dynamics in nine human cell types. Nature 473 ,43-U52 (2011). 53. Andersson, R. et al. An atlas of active enhancers across human cell types and tissues. Nature 507 , 455-+ (2014). 54. Frankish, A. et al. GENCODE: reference annotation for the human and mouse genomes in 2023. 

Nucleic Acids Res 51 , D942-D949 (2023). 55. Kolasinska-Zwierz, P. et al. Differential chromatin marking of introns and expressed exons by H3K36me3. Nature Genetics 41 , 376-381 (2009). 56. O'Leary, N.A. et al. Reference sequence (RefSeq) database at NCBI: current status, taxonomic expansion, and functional annotation. Nucleic Acids Res 44 , D733-D745 (2016). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

57. Gao, T.S. & Qian, J. EnhancerAtlas 2.0: an updated resource with enhancer annotation in 586 tissue/cell types across nine species. Nucleic Acids Res 48 , D58-D64 (2020). 58. Landrum, M.J. et al. ClinVar: public archive of relationships among sequence variation and human phenotype. Nucleic Acids Res 42 , D980-985 (2014). 59. Rada-Iglesias, A. et al. A unique chromatin signature uncovers early developmental enhancers in humans. Nature 470 , 279-+ (2011). 60. Heinz, S. et al. Simple Combinations of Lineage-Determining Transcription Factors Prime -Regulatory Elements Required for Macrophage and B Cell Identities. Molecular Cell 38 , 576-589 (2010). 61. Barski, A. et al. High-resolution profiling of histone methylations in the human genome. Cell 129 , 823-837 (2007). 62. Heintzman, N.D. & Ren, B. The gateway to transcription: identifying, characterizing and understanding promoters in the eukaryotic genome. Cell Mol Life Sci 64 , 386-400 (2007). 63. Carbon, S. et al. The Gene Ontology resource: enriching a GOld mine. Nucleic Acids Res 49 , D325-D334 (2021). 64. Kanehisa, M., Furumichi, M., Sato, Y., Kawashima, M. & Ishiguro-Watanabe, M. KEGG for taxonomy-based analysis of pathways and genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 51 , D587-D592 (2023). 65. Shim, W.J. et al. Conserved Epigenetic Regulatory Logic Infers Genes Governing Cell Identity. Cell Syst 11 , 625-+ (2020). 66. Svensson, V., Gayoso, A., Yosef, N. & Pachter, L. Interpretable factor models of single-cell RNA-seq via variational autoencoders. Bioinformatics 36 , 3418-3421 (2020). 67. Mizikovsky, D., Sanchez, M.N., Nefzger, C.M., Partida, G.C. & Palpant, N.J. Organization of gene programs revealed by unsupervised analysis of diverse gene-trait associations. Nucleic Acids Res 50 

(2022). 68. Zhou, W. et al. Global Biobank Meta-analysis Initiative: Powering genetic discovery across human disease. Cell Genom 2 (2022). 69. Aguet, F. et al. The GTEx Consortium atlas of genetic regulatory effects across human tissues. Science 

369 , 1318-1330 (2020). 70. Qiu, M.T. et al. KDM4B and KDM4A promote endometrial cancer progression by regulating androgen receptor, c-myc, and p27. Oncotarget 6, 31702-31720 (2015). 71. Guan, M., Wu, X.W., Chu, P.G. & Chow, W.A. Fatty acid synthase reprograms the epigenome in uterine leiomyosarcomas. Plos One 12 (2017). 72. Castillo-Aguilar, L. et al. Association between diffusion capacity and endothelial function in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Eur Respir J 52 (2018). 73. de Melo, I.G. et al. Endothelial Dysfunction Markers in Ovarian Cancer: VTE Risk and Tumour Prognostic Outcomes. Life-Basel 14 (2024). 74. Kleinschnitz, C. et al. Regulatory T cells are strong promoters of acute ischemic stroke in mice by inducing dysfunction of the cerebral microvasculature. Blood 121 , 679-691 (2013). 75. Chen, C. et al. Metabolic Dysfunction-associated Steatotic Liver Disease Increases the Risk of Primary Open-Angle Glaucoma. Ophthalmol Glaucoma 8, 266-274 (2025). 76. Wang, L.X. & Wei, X. T Cell-Mediated Autoimmunity in Glaucoma Neurodegeneration. Front Immunol 

12 (2021). 77. Zhang, T., Xie, X.L. & Lu, F. Primary open-angle glaucoma: Neuroendocrine-immune disorder? Med Hypotheses 83 , 514-515 (2014). 78. Romeo, S. et al. Genetic variation in PNPLA3 confers susceptibility to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. 

Nature Genetics 40 , 1461-1465 (2008). 79. Pingitore, P. & Romeo, S. The role of PNPLA3 in health and disease. Bba-Mol Cell Biol L 1864 , 900-906 (2019). 80. Bick, A.G. et al. Genomic data in the All of Us Research Program. Nature 627 (2024). 81. Chen, S.W. et al. A genomic mutational constraint map using variation in 76,156 human genomes. 

Nature 625 (2024). 82. Zhang, Y. et al. Model-based Analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome Biol 9 (2008). 83. Jeon, H., Lee, H., Kang, B., Jang, I. & Roh, T.Y. Comparative analysis of commonly used peak calling programs for ChIP-Seq analysis. Genomics Inform 18 , e42 (2020). 84. Quinlan, A.R. & Hall, I.M. BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features. 

Bioinformatics 26 , 841-842 (2010). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.01.722123 doi: bioRxiv preprint

85. Raudvere, U. et al. g:Profiler: a web server for functional enrichment analysis and conversions of gene lists (2019 update). Nucleic Acids Res 47 , W191-W198 (2019). 86. Chawla, N.V., Bowyer, K.W., Hall, L.O. & Kegelmeyer, W.P. SMOTE: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique. J Artif Intell Res 16 , 321-357 (2002). 87. Frankish, A. et al. Gencode 2021. Nucleic Acids Res 49 , D916-D923 (2021). 88. Liu, K., Ye, J., Yang, Y., Shen, L. & Jiang, H. A Unified Model for Differential Expression Analysis of RNA-seq Data via L1-Penalized Linear Regression. arXiv (2016). 89. Mizikovsky, D., Wray, N.R., Shah, S. & Palpant, N. Unsupervised Variant Clustering Identifies Genetic Subtypes of Disease. bioRxiv , 2025.2007.2001.662666 (2025). 90. Hubert, L. & Arabie, P. Comparing Partitions. J Classif 2, 193-218 (1985). 91. Carss, K. et al. Whole-genome sequencing of 490,640 UK Biobank participants. Nature 645 (2025). 92. Lagou, V. et al. GWAS of random glucose in 476,326 individuals provide insights into diabetes pathophysiology, complications and treatment stratification. Nature Genetics 55 , 1448-+ (2023). 93. Yengo, L. et al. Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies for height and body mass index in 

∼700 000 individuals of European ancestry. Human Molecular Genetics 27 , 3641-3649 (2018). 94. Schoenfelder, S. et al. Polycomb repressive complex PRC1 spatially constrains the mouse embryonic stem cell genome. Nat Genet 47 , 1179-1186 (2015). 95. Purcell, S. et al. PLINK: A tool set for whole-genome association and population-based linkage analyses. 

American Journal of Human Genetics 81 , 559-575 (2007). 96. Kho, A.N. et al. Use of diverse electronic medical record systems to identify genetic risk for type 2 diabetes within a genome-wide association study. J Am Med Inform Assn 19 , 212-218 (2012). 97. Altshuler, D.M. et al. A global reference for human genetic variation. Nature 526 , 68-+ (2015). 98. Mahajan, A. et al. Multi-ancestry genetic study of type 2 diabetes highlights the power of diverse populations for discovery and translation. Nature Genetics 54 , 560-+ (2022). 99. Wu, Y. et al. Genome-wide fine-mapping improves identification of causal variants. medRxiv ,2024.2007.2018.24310667 (2025). 100. Gazal, S. et al. Linkage disequilibrium-dependent architecture of human complex traits shows action of negative selection. Nature Genetics 49 , 1421-+ (2017). 101. Máarquez-Luna, C. et al. Incorporating functional priors improves polygenic prediction accuracy in UK Biobank and 23andMe data sets. Nat Commun 12 (2021). 102. Lopez, R., Regier, J., Cole, M.B., Jordan, M.I. & Yosef, N. Deep generative modeling for single-cell transcriptomics. Nat Methods 15 , 1053-+ (2018).