Title: Quantitative prediction of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay across human genes by genomic language model and large-scale mutational scanning

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 46

Markdown Content:
Quantitative prediction of nonsense -mediated 

# mRNA decay across human genes by genomic 

# language model and large -scale mutational 

# scanning 

Marcell Veiner 1,† , Ignasi Toledano 1,2 ,† , Guillermo Palou -Márquez 1, 3, Ben Lehner 2,4,5,6,* , Fran 

Supek 1,3,4,*  

> 1

Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona, Spain.  

> 2

Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain  

> 3

Biotech Research & Innovation Centre (BRIC) , University of Copenhagen, Denmark.  

> 4

Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain  

> 5

University Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain  

> 6

Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK  

> †

equal -contribution first authors 

* correspondence to  bl11@sanger.ac.uk  and  fran.supek@bric.ku.dk 

# Abstract 

The molecular consequences of protein truncating variants depend strongly on whether their 

transcripts are eliminated by nonsense -mediated mRNA decay (NMD), yet NMD is still 

predicted largely from a small set of binary positional rules. How individual premature 

termination codons (PTCs) engage NMD across genes and transcript contexts therefore 

remains incompletely resolved. Here we integrated endogenous allele -specific PTC 

expression from large -scale genomic data, mRNA language -model prediction and high -

thr oughput mutational scanning to revisit the rules that govern mammalian NMD. Using allele -

specific expression measurements from large human cohorts, we trained NMDetective -AI on 

~14,000 somatic PTCs, and after testing it on ~1,800 germline PTCs, found that it improves 

on previous models, with its accuracy approaching the reproducibility of the underlying 

measurements. We then generated experimental maps of NMD with deep mutational 

scanning, including ~450 PTCs nearby the 50 -nt penultimate exon boundary, ~950 

engineered PTCs across 9 exon lengths to resolve long -exon escape, and ~11k PTCs across 

139 genes to quantify and refine start -proximal evasion. Our results support the positional 

logic of mammalian NMD yet show that this logic is implemented quantitatively: the classical 

rules resolve into graded, gene -dependent response curves whose boundaries are shaped by 

transcript architecture and modulated by local sequence context. Applying this framework to 

populati on, disease and cancer datasets further identifie s genes in which NMD is predicted to 

aggravate or ameliorate the effects of truncating variants, providing a basis for variant 

interpretation and for prioritizing NMD -directed therapies. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Introduction 

Nonsense -mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a translation -dependent quality control pathway 

that actively degrades transcripts harboring premature termination codons (PTCs) due to 

mutation or altered splicing, thereby preventing the accumulation of truncated, po tentially 

harmful peptides. Beyond surveillance of pathological transcripts, NMD also controls a 

pervasive regulatory network, constitutively degrading ~5 -20% of the physiological 

transcriptome in homeostatic conditions 1–4.

The biophysical decision “algorithm” that dictates whether a specific PTC -containing transcript 

is degraded by NMD or evades detection (allowing translation of a truncated protein) relies 

strongly on the longitudinal arrangement of features along the trans cript, specifically the 

position of the terminating ribosome relative to downstream exon junctions. In mammalian 

cells, the splicing machinery deposits an exon junction complex (EJC) ~20 –24 nucleotides 

upstream of an exon -exon junction. According to the cl assical "50 -nucleotide rule," if a 

ribosome stalls at a PTC located more than 50 –55 nucleotides upstream of the final exon -

exon junction, the downstream EJC is not displaced by the terminating ribosome. This retained 

EJC subsequently recruits UPF and SMG s urveillance factors (e.g. UPF1, SMG1, SMG6, 

SMG7), triggering endonucleolytic and exonucleolytic decay of the mRNA. Conversely, PTCs 

located in the final exon, or within the distal ~50 nucleotides of the penultimate exon, typically 

fail to trigger the NMD machinery 5–9 because the terminating ribosome clears all downstream 

EJCs. Additional exceptions to canonical EJC -dependent decay have also been identified, 

including start -proximal NMD evasion in the first ~100 -200 nts of the coding sequence, often 

driven by translati on reinitiation at downstream AUG codons 6,10 –13  and EJC -independent NMD 

triggered by long 3′ untranslated regions (UTRs) 14 –16 .

Historically, these topological NMD rules were painstakingly elucidated through low -

throughput, locus -specific functional assays on individual disease genes such as HBB (e.g. 17 

BRCA1 (e.g. 18 ), or DMD (e.g. 19 ). The advent of massive, pan -cancer and population -scale 

genomic datasets (e.g., TCGA, GTEx, gnomAD) allowed researchers to evaluate NMD rules 

genome -wide by associating gene expression differences with presence of a PTC 6,9,20,21 .

These large -scale analyses confirmed that while the canonical NMD rules (such as the 50 -nt 

boundary) are statistically robust at a global scale, they are lacking as quantitative predictors, 

leaving a substantial fraction – approximately one -third – of the variance in NMD efficiency 

across PTCs unexplained 22 . The above highlights the limitations of treating NMD as a simple 

binary switch; instead, the likely case is that NMD efficiency is a continuous quantity, with 

NMD rules having “blurry” boundaries, and additionally modulated by local sequence context 

and ot her complex biophysical features that have historically been abstracted away. 

In addition to the canonical 50 -nucleotide boundary, several other NMD rules have been 

proposed largely on the basis of bioinformatic inference. For instance, the "long -exon rule", 

which posits that PTCs residing in exons >400 nt partially escape NMD specu latively due to 

the spatial dissociation of the terminating ribosome from downstream EJCs – was derived 

from cancer genomic dataset analysis 6 and independently replicated in other genomic 

datasets 20,23 . However, this lacks systematic experimental support, leaving unclear possible 

confounding effects and also the exact contributions of PTC distances to 5’ and 3’ exon ends 

towards determining NMD activity. Similarly, the "start -proximal rule", reported from single -

gene studies and recapitulated in genomics observational data analyses 6,20,21,23,24 , still has 

limited scope of experimental validation: the shape of the decrease in NMD activity towards 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

the 5’ coding region is not well characterized, as well as the quantitative relevance of 

translation reinitiation as an NMD escape mechanism. 

As a conceptual limitation, it remains unknown to what extent these NMD rules vary across 

the transcriptome. A priori, it does not seem likely that the boundaries of local NMD -evading 

regions would be universally fixed at a precise nucleotide distance; rat her, they may "wobble" 

from gene to gene, for instance due to RNA structure, cis -regulatory elements or ribosome 

dynamics, and the extent of this between -gene variability is unknown. To model this 

presumably sequence -dependent variability, deep learning ar chitectures – specifically 

DNA/RNA genomic language models (reviewed in 25 ) – offer a powerful paradigm. By 

extracting the hidden grammar of the transcriptome from vast evolutionary datasets 26 –28  these 

models can in principle identify complex sequence motifs and interactions; one example 

thereof would be positioning relative to exon -exon junctions, which is critical for NMD 

modelling. Ultimately, however, even sophisticated in silico predictions based on transcript 

sequence remain correlative, unless supported by (ideally high -throughput) experimental 

validation that directly observes effects of various introduced PTCs on NMD activity, in context 

of specific placement. 

Achieving high -resolution, accurate models of NMD efficiency applicable to every transcript is 

a necessity for translational applications in genetic medicine. Accurate NMD predictions are 

needed to resolve the molecular impact of putatively pathogenic nons ense and frameshift 

variants 22,23,29 –32  and to clarify the dual, often paradoxical role of NMD in genetic disease 

variants, including cancer driver mutations (reviewed in 33 –35 ). For some loci, NMD clears 

transcripts that would otherwise encode harmful dominant -negative or neomorphic proteins; 

in others, NMD degrades transcripts that could have yielded partially -functional protein 

truncations. Disentangling the former case of NMD -ameliorated genetic disease alleles, from 

the latter case of NMD -aggravated PTC alleles is a prerequisite for inferring whether a patient 

will safely benefit from NMD inhibitors and/or PTC readthrough therapies 36 –41 .

Here, we integrate pan -tissue genomic and transcriptomic datasets to map the quantitative 

landscape of NMD efficiency at base -pair resolution. By leveraging allele -specific expression 

as a precise readout of transcript levels contingent on a PTC, we train NMDetective -AI, a deep 

learning framework built upon a foundational RNA language model. To systematically validate 

the model’s predictions and empirically dissect the physical boundaries of local NMD evasion, 

including the long -exon and start -proximal rule s, we couple our computational inferences with 

a comprehensive high -throughput deep mutational scanning (DMS) interrogating >100 genes 

in human cells. Finally, we apply this integrated framework to clinical and cancer genomic 

databases to clarify the patho genicity of germline and somatic nonsense variants. By 

stratifying disease genes into NMD -aggravated and NMD -ameliorated categories, we define 

a predictive genomic map that clarifies potential for benefit from pharmacological NMD 

modulation guided by the g enomic sequence. 

# Results 

# Quantifying NMD efficiency of nonsense variants in somatic human 

# tissues at a large scale 

A comprehensive, accurate training dataset is essential for developing a highly performant 

machine learning model, and we aimed to assess premature termination codons (PTCs) 

expressed across a variety of human tissues for their visibility to NMD silencing at the mRNA 

level. By integrating whole -exome sequencing (WES) variant calls and RNA -seq data, we 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

assembled a large -scale dataset of tumor tissues, in which somatic mutations and germline 

variants causing PTCs were considered, and of healthy human tissues, in which germline 

PTCs were analyzed for their association with mRNA levels (Fig. 1). In particul ar, we assessed 

NMD efficiency for each PTC observed in TCGA (9,752 individuals, 8,786 tumor samples, 31 

cancer types) and GTEx 42  (838 individuals, 15,247 healthy samples, 56 tissues) using allele -

specific expression (ASE), as the negative log2 of the ratio in mRNA expression of the mutant 

allele relative to the wild -type allele (Methods). 

We applied standard stringent quality filters to the PTC calls (Fig. S1), such as filtering out 

variants in regions affected by somatic copy number alterations, lowly expressed genes, 

common germline variants, multi -nucleotide variants (MNV) that may be re scued by adjacent 

substitutions and ambiguous NMD classification between transcripts of the same gene 1,20,32 ,

and others (see Methods for exhaustive list of filtering steps; summary in Fig. 1; Fig S1). The 

resulting dataset comprises 22,535 somatic TCGA PTCs (9,059 nonsense SNVs and 13,476 

frameshifting indels), 1,550 germline TCGA PTCs (1,401 nonsense and 149 i ndels), and 

11,335 germline GTEx PTCs (all nonsense). 

As a check on the dataset quality, we considered PTCs classified as NMD -evading by the 

canonical, “EJC model” NMD rule 5,6,43  – i.e. PTCs located in the last exon or 55 nucleotides 

upstream of the last exon junction. We also considered the 2 additional rules implemented in 

our recent “NMDetective -B” decision tree model 22,44  – the “start -proximal” rule of NMD escape 

in the first 150 coding nucleotides, or the partial NMD evasion “long -exon” rule in exons longer 

than 400nt. Indeed, the NMD -evading PTCs classified by NMDetective -B rules showed lower 

NMD efficiency across all three variant sets (TCGA somatic mutations: mean log 2 ratio of 1.67 

in NMD -triggering vs. 0.71 in NMD -escaping; TCGA germline variants: 2.27 vs. 0.36; GTEx 

rare germline variants: 1.15 vs. 0.18; Fig. S2). Encouragingly, while NMDetective -B decision 

tree was developed using the TCGA somatic mutation dataset 22  (here we employ an ASE -

based quantification approach 21,24 ), this data suggests that the two additional, germline PTC 

datasets have similar or higher signal and therefore utility for developing and/or testing more 

complex NMD models. Indeed, there is likely a need for these additional datasets , as the 

NMDetective -B captured about ~2/3 of the total explainable variance in NMD efficiency acting 

upon held -out PTC variants 22 . Improving this would not only allow more accurate prediction of 

PTC pathogenicity in genetic disease and in cancer but has the potential to refine mechanistic 

knowledge about NMD. 

Figure 1: Overview of the NMD efficiency datasets and NMDetective -AI. 

Nonsense -mediated decay (NMD) efficiency (NMDeff) was quantified for premature 

termination codons (PTCs) identified in TCGA (somatic and germline) and GTEx (germline) 

cohorts. NMDeff is calculated as the negative log2 of the ratio in mRNA expression of the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

mutant allele relative to the wild -type allele. Pre -processing : Raw PTC calls were filtered to 

remove confounders such as high tumor mutational burden, somatic copy number alterations, 

and multi -nucleotide variants (see Methods). For modelling, values were further transformed 

by regressing out technical covariates and normalizing against canonical NMD -triggering and 

evading controls. Dataset: The curated dataset was partitioned into training/validation sets by 

chromosomes (TCGA somatic) and independent test sets (TCGA germline and GTEx), 

comprising both single -nucleotide variants (SNVs) and indels. Encode: Transcript sequences 

(5’ UTR, CDS, and 3’ UTR) were represented as 6 -track one -hot encodings, incorporating the 

DNA sequence, the reading frame/CDS boundaries, and splice site positions. Model: The 

NMDetective -AI model, built upon the pretrained Orthrus fo undation model, underwent full 

finetuning to predict normalized NMDeff from the multi -track sequence input. 

# RNA foundation model used to derive NMDetective -AI, accurate predictor 

# of NMD efficiency genome -wide 

We developed NMDetective -AI, a deep learning model that builds upon the Orthrus genomic 

foundation model for mRNA 28  finetuned for sequence -based prediction of NMD efficiency. 

Orthrus is a Mamba -based model with ~10M parameters pretrained on mature mRNAs i.e. 

without introns, but with encoded exonic sequence and explicit positions of 5’ UTR, CDS, 5’ 

UTR and crucially, sp lice sites, pretrained on ~45M transcripts from diverse mammalian 

organisms 28 . Our study fine -tunes Orthrus foundation model on human full -length transcript 

sequences (including 5' UTR, CDS, and 3' UTR) containing PTC variants, to predict the 

normalized NMD efficiency of a PTC variant (Fig. 1). 

For the RNA language model training, we further processed the PTC datasets by more quality 

filtering (see Methods; Fig. S2 -3), correcting for systematic biases (tissue, overlap between 

variant sets, expression variability), and aggregating recurrent varian ts by median NMD 

efficiency, yielding 15,200 unique somatic, and 1,065 unique germline PTCs from TCGA, and 

763 unique germline PTCs from GTEx (Fig. 1). NMD efficiency values were then normalized 

using a linear transformation based on the mean efficiency of NMD -triggering variants (those 

predicted to undergo NMD by established rules) and last -exon variants (predicted to fully 

escape NMD), mapping the data to a standardized range (performed on all datasets 

independently), where +0.5 corresponds to full NMD ef ficiency upon that PTC and -0.5 

corresponds to no NMD efficiency (PTCs in last exons; Fig. S3). This quantity is not strictly 

bounded, due to measurement noise or prediction noise, actual values can fall outside that 

range (Fig. S3). 

NMDetective -AI was trained on 14,337 somatic premature termination codon (PTC) variants 

from TCGA, using chromosomes 1 and 20 as a held -out validation set (863 high quality, 

unique variants). Sequences were encoded as 6 -track one -hot representations: 4 nuc leotide 

tracks, 1 coding sequence (CDS) track marking the start of each codon, and 1 splice site track 

indicating exon -exon junctions (Fig. 1). To identify optimal model configurations, including fine -

tuning parameters such as learning rate (see Methods) a nd the prediction head architecture, 

we performed a Bayesian hyperparameter search using the W&B tool, while minimizing the 

validation set loss (Fig. S4) to obtain the final model, henceforth “NMDetective -AI”. 

To assess the contribution of pretrained Orthrus representations, versus the Orthrus neural 

net architecture alone but excluding pretrained information, we compared three training 

strategies: (1) full fine -tuning of the entire neural net including all laye rs of the Orthrus encoder, 

(2) probing with frozen Orthrus encoder weights, training only the added regression head, and 

(3) random initialization of the Orthrus encoder without pretraining. Training iteration curves 

revealed stark differences in dynamics and the final performance on validation set loss 

function across these approaches (Fig. 2a). Full fine -tuning achieved the best performance 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

with validation Spearman ρ=0.668 (R²=0.437, calculated from sum of squares, see Methods), 

while the limited approach to fine -tuning a head for probing with frozen encoder RNA 

embeddings reached a maximum ρ=0.408 (R²=0.166), plateauing earlier. This demonst rates 

that while pretrained features (embeddings) capture useful patterns, task -specific adaptation 

of the pre -trained neural net optimizes NMD prediction. Remarkably, random initialization 

without pretraining achieved only ρ=0.068 (R²=0.004) correlation, confirming the utility of the 

Orthrus as a mRNA foundation model with representations, derived from massive data 28 , that 

are effectively repurposed when fine -tuning on a modestly -sized dataset such as ours. 

We evaluated NMDetective -AI's ability to generalize to germline variants – crucial for 

applications to interpreting pathogenic PTC causing genetic disease (Fig. 2b). On germline 

TCGA variants, the model achieved Spearman ρ=0.642, and R²=0.338. Performance on GTEx 

ρ=0.562, R²=0.258) suggesting broadly consistent performance in the cancerous somatic 

tissues and in normal samples. Moreover, NMDetective -AI substantially outperformed our 

previous generation hand -crafted feature -based approaches , NMDetective -A an d B  22  across 

all test sets (Fig. 2b; here we have refit ted the NMDetective -A Random Forest model to match 

our transformed distribution of NMD efficiency labels). On the held -out validation 

chromosomes from somatic TCGA PTCs, NMDetective -AI achieved Spearman ρ=0.668, and 

R²=0.437, compared to NMDetective -B's ρ=0.633, R²=0.348, while NMDetective -A (refit) 

achieved ρ=0.642, R²=0.385. The performance advantage of NMDetective -AI was consistent 

across germline TCGA (ρ improvement of 0.642 vs 0.617 for NMDetective -B) a nd GTEx (ρ of 

0.562 vs 0.528 for NMDetective -B), demonstrating that the learned mRNA sequence 

representations via a foundation model fine -tuned on a targeted, high -quality dataset of causal 

PTCs has provided a robust, universal NMD predictive model. 

To contextualize model performance in terms of maximum attainable accuracy adjusted for 

measurement error (as before for NMDetective), we assessed the reproducibility of ASE -

based NMD efficiency measurements (Fig. 2c -e) across 618 PTCs with ≥3 repeated 

occ urrences. Inter -replicate correlation was Spearman ρ=0.697, establishing an empirical 

upper bound for prediction accuracy (Fig. 2c). NMDetective -AI approaches this ceiling on the 

somatic TCGA validation set (ρ=0.668, i.e. 96% of maximum, Fig. 2b). Comparin g ASE 

measurements for the same variants across the somatic data and the 2 germline datasets 

revealed the inter -replicate correlations in these settings: somatic vs germline TCGA ρ=0.519 

(Fig. 2d), and somatic TCGA vs GTEx ρ=0.454 (Fig. 2e). We note that N MDetective -AI 

performance estimated via Spearman rho on these datasets was slightly above these numbers 

(see above), suggesting NMDetective -AI models NMD activity upon germline PTCs highly 

accurately and additionally that the model may be “smoothing over” some technical and 

biological differences between datasets, which we see as desirable. 

To highlight examples of application, we tested NMDetective -AI on 26 recurrently mutated 

PTCs (≥3 observations, somatic SNVs in the TCGA cohort) in known cancer driver genes ( Fig. 

2f). In these cases of clinically important somatic PTC mutations, accurate NMD prediction 

could inform patient stratification and therapeutic targeting by NMD inhibitors (reviewed in 34 

and readthrough agents 37 ). NMDetective -AI yielded Spearman ρ=0.638, outperforming our 

previous NMDetective -B (ρ=0.563). NMDetective -AI predictions of NMD activity upon these 

26 recurrent variants were mostly (17/25) within the interquartile range (shown on selected 

PTCs in Fig. 2 f) of the observed NMD efficiency scores (diagonal in Fig. 2f), illustrating the 

utility of NMDetective -AI for characterizing NMD effects of pathogenic mutations. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 2: NMDetective -AI model development and validation. 

(a) Pearson correlation on the validation set during training for three model variants: 

NMDetective -AI (finetuned Orthrus encoder and regression head), Orthrus probing only 

(frozen Orthrus encoder with trained regression head), and Mamba no pretraining (randomly 

initialized encoder with the same configuration as Orthrus). Early stopping occurred at step 42 

(approximately 3 epochs). (b) Comparison of NMDetective -AI performance with previous 

methods across three datasets: somatic TCGA (validation chromosomes only), germline 

TCGA, and GTEx. NMDetective -A: Random Forest regression model; NMDetective -B (refit to 

training data): decision tree classifier; these two models were reimplemented in this study 

following its original design but using the updated datasets. NMDetective -B (original): fixed 

decision tree with manually defined thresholds as published; NMDetective -AI: this study. 

Spearman correlation (ρ) and R² values (see Methods) shown. (c) Split -half reliability of ASE 

NMD efficiency measurements across biolo gical replicates. PTCs with ≥3 observations were 

randomly split into two groups, mean NMD efficiency calculated per group, and correlation 

measured across 100 random splits. Red: NMD -triggering PTCs; Blue: NMD -evading PTCs. 

(d -e) Correlation between ASE NM D efficiency in somatic TCGA and germline TCGA (d) or 

GTEx (e) for overlapping variants (median values per variant). (f) Scatter plot comparing 

NMDetective -B (pink square) and NMDetective -AI (blue triangle) model predictions (x -axis) 

and observed NMD effic iency (y -axis, median across replicates) for recurrent PTCs (≥3 

observations) in cancer genes (tumor suppressors and oncogenes). Horizontal error bars on 

randomly selected variants (filled in symbols; and textual annotations) indicate 25th -75th 

percentile range across observed replicates. Unselected variants shown in hollow symbols 

and without error bars to improve visual clarity. Spearman correlation and R² shown for each 

model. The dashed line indicates perfect agreement in panels (d -g). 

# Large -scale mutagenesis to measure NMD in human cells 

NMDetective -AI shows exceptional predictive accuracy therefore we reasoned we could use 

it to systematically re -assess and refine the established NMD rules, considering NMDetective -

AI predictions that deviate from binary NMD -escape/trigger classifications, particularly for 

edge cases near rule boundaries. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Firstly, we considered the classical last -exon/50 -nt rule, which has ample prior experimental 

evidence, yet there is an opportunity to better quantitate the partial NMD evasion near the 50 

nt boundary. Secondly, we considered the start -proximal rule of NMD evasion, which has 

sparse experimental evidence yet in our genomics analyses has fairly prominent coverage of 

PTCs (12% in NMDetective -B model 22 ) therefore needs further study to assess the length of 

the evading segment, the strength of the evasion as a function of distance from the start codon, 

as well as the variation of these quantities across genes. Thirdly, we examined the long -exon 

NMD evasion rule identified in our genomic analyses 22 . However, to our knowledge, this rule 

lacks direct experimental validation and requires further support, as well as precise 

quantification of NMD effects across exon lengths and PTC positions within the exon. 

Probing the genomics -based NMDetective -AI by model in silico mutagenesis (ISM) can 

provide insight into the robust patterns observed across training data, thus refining the NMD 

rules, however we reasoned that controlled experiment al testing allows external test ing of the 

rules and the refinements, and offers crucial evidence to support the genomics analysis with 

controlled perturbation. To this end, we designed various deep mutational scan ning (DMS) 

libraries for measuring degradation, via NMD, of PTC varia nts introduced into minigene 

reporter constructs in a human cell line (Fig. 3a). Libraries were ordered as synthesized 

oligonucleotides or generated with nicking mutagenesis, a primer -based mutagenesis 

strategy 45  (see Methods), cloned into a mammalian NMD -reporter and transfected into HeLa 

cells 48h post -transfection mRNA was extracted, reverse transcribed to cDNA, amplified and 

sequenced with short -read ( Illumina ) or long -read ( Nanopore , ONT) platforms ; referred to as 

‘output’. Library DNA was also sequenced before transfection to quantify variant frequency in 

the absence of selection, referred to as ‘input’. We included non -PTC control variants for 

normalization: for some libraries, we designed the sam e set of va riants encoding UGG 

(tryptophan) instead of a PTC; for others, we encoded a non -PTC variant with the original WT 

sequence. We calculated mRNA level scores and associated errors using DiMSum 46 

(Methods). Briefly, the RNA levels of each variant correspond to the ratio of its frequency after 

(output) and before (input) selection, normalized to the WT and log transformed (base e). 

Scores of <0, and ≥0 indicate lower and equal -or -higher RNA levels than the wild -type; 

respectively. Variants with <10 reads were discarded. 

We designed independent DMS libraries and minigenes to explore the last -exon/50 nt, long -

exon, and start -proximal rules of NMD evasion (Fig. 3b, Fig. 3c -e, Fig. S5), with high 

correlations between three biological replicates of Spearman ρ≥ 0.92 (penultimate exon 50nt 

rule, Fig. 3c), ρ≥ 0.84 (long -exon, Fig. 3d) and ρ ≥0.73 for the start -proximal rule (Fig. 3d). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 3: Mutagenesis experiment overview and inter -replicate correlation. 

(a) Schematic overview of deep mutational scanning (DMS) experimental setup to measure 

NMD degradation of PTC bearing RNAs. (b) Schematic depicting the NMD evasion rules 

tested in DMS experiments. (c -e) Inter -replicate correlation for DMS experiments. Grid of 

scatter plots showing biological replicate comparisons for three DMS datasets (50 

nt/penultimate exon experiment in BRCA1 minigene (c), see Fig. S5a for the ATP7A minigene; 

long exon experiment in BRCA1 (d); start proximal experiment with data pooled over 122 

genes (e)). Each point represents one PTC variant, with RNA level measurements from 

different replicates compared. All three pairwise comparisons of 3 biological repeat s are 

overlaid in different colors (orange: rep1 vs rep2; blue: rep1 vs rep3; green: rep2 vs rep3). 

Spearman correlation coefficients (ρ) shown in legends. Dashed black line indicates perfect 

correlation. 

# Refining the 50 -nt rule of NMD escape by genomic model and 

# experimental data 

To quantitatively characterize the canonical, last -exon/50 -55 nucleotide rule (Fig. 3b), we 

mutated the 3' -most 76 amino acid positions (228 nucleotides) of the penultimate exons of 

BRCA1 and ATP7A to all three stop codons (UAG, UAA, UGA) in their respective minigenes 

(Fig. 4a). We measured RNA abundance for 293 variants per gene (Fig. S6), with Illumina 

sequencing median coverage of >=190 reads per variant and inter -replicate correlations of 

ρ≥ 0.92 (Fig. S5a, Fig. 3c). To match the directionality of our NMD efficiency predictions from 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

NMDetective -AI, RNA abundance levels from DMS were sign -flipped and normalized to the 

scale of predictions i.e. full NMD efficiency at +0.5 and no NMD at -0.5 (Fig. S3). 

DMS data revealed a gradual, rather than categorical, change in NMD evasion responses in 

the exon junction -proximal penultimate exon region (Fig. 4b -c, Fig. S6). LOESS smoothing 

(R²=0.83 for BRCA1 ; Fig. 4b, and R²=0.81 for ATP7A ; Fig. 4c) showed NMD efficiency 

progressively decreased across the -54 to -42 nucleotide window, which meant an RNA 

abundance increase from ~30% to ~100% of the wildtype in both genes. PTCs beyond -54 

nucleotides upstream exhibited 2.7 -fold and 4.6 -fold g reater NMD efficiency than t hose within 

the -42 nucleotide boundary ( ATP7A , BRCA1 , respectively; p < 0.01 for both). This gradual 

transition suggests positional variability in EJC interaction with the NMD machinery. 

The DMS experiment data LOESS curve showed strong concordance with LOESS fit to 

somatic TCGA PTC mutation data in penultimate exon regions across both genes (Fig. 4b -c; 

n=553 penultimate exon PTCs in TCGA, ρ=0.79 for ATP7A , ρ=0.74 for BRCA1 ), validating 

that experimental minigene systems recapitulate endogenous NMD responses. NMDetective -

AI predictions demonstrated strong agreement with both DMS observations , outperforming 

our previous decision model that outputs a binary response (NMDetective -B, re -impleme nted 

here): R²=0.91 vs 0.80 for ATP7A , and R²=0.82 vs 0.41 for BRCA1 . These very high 

correlations between predictions of NMDetective -AI and the DMS experimental readouts 

reassure about the quality of both the predictions and the experimental data. 

To characterize the NMD transition quantitatively, we fitted four -parameter logistic curves to 

the NMDetective -AI predictions (see Methods), capturing the gradual decline in NMD 

efficiency (R²=0.84, and R²=0.93 for ATP7A and BRCA1 gene DMS levels, respecti vely). The 

curve had inflection points at nucleotide -51 for both ATP7A and BRCA1 predictions, with local 

NMD evasion rate indicating smooth transitions (Fig. 4b -c). 

We further performed in silico mutagenesis, predicting the NMD efficiency of PTCs at each 

position across all genes with NMDetective -AI, and fitted four -parameter logistic curves to 

predictions in penultimate exon regions (Table S1). Analysis of ~15k transcripts (with ≥3 

coding exons; Methods) revealed consistent logistic -shaped transitions (Fig. 4d -e, Fig. S7), 

with high -quality fits to predictions (R² ≥ 0.7) achieved for 92% of transcripts (Fig. 4d), 

validating the simple logistic model as an interpretable yet local model of the 50nt penultimate 

exon NMD escape. The mean NMD efficiency changed from 0.5 (“MAX” in Fig 4e, sd across 

genes =0.34) towards -0.53 (“MIN” in Fig 4e, sd =0.27) at the last exon junction. The mean 

inflection point (“I” in Fig. 4e) occurred at ~54 nucleotides upstream ( sd =30.95; Fig. S7). The 

rate of NMD evasion (ER, Fig. 4e) was similar to BRCA1 (with a value of 20; Fig. 4b) for the 

majorit y of genes (Fig. S7), with a tail of genes exhibiting a more gradual change, like TP53, 

PTEN, BRCA2 (Fig. 4e), and ATP7A (Fig. 4c). Fitted logistic parameters for the 50 -nt rule for 

all transcripts are available in Table S1 .

Overall, this shows that a refined quantitative 50 -nt rule of NMD evasion , revised from a step 

function to a logistic one, is precisely predicted by our genomic language model. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 4: NMDetective -AI captures and predicts quantitative NMD evasion in 

penultimate and last exons. 

(a) Schematic of the penultimate exon DMS experiment setup. (b -c) Comparison of 

NMDetective -AI predictions with DMS observations (all stop types pooled, see Fig. S6 for 

individual stop type effects) for PTCs in penultimate and last exon regions of BRCA1 (b ) and 

ATP7A (c) genes. NMDetective -AI predictions (crosses) are shown alongside DMS 

observations (yellow circles with LOESS curve). Background shows LOESS -smoothed NMD 

efficiency from TCGA PTCs across all genes (gray curve with 95% confidence interval). 

Ve rtical lines indicate the last exon junction (solid) and 55 -nucleotide rule boundary (dashed). 

Spearman correlations (ρ) and R² values between NMDetective -AI predictions and DMS 

LOESS curve are shown in legends. A 4 parameter logistic (4PL) curve, formula in bottom left 

corners, fit to the predictions are shown in dark blue solid lines. (d) R² values of the 4PL curve 

fits to genome -wide PTC scan predictions, R² values of selected genes highlighted as dashed 

lines. (e) Fitted 4PL NMD evasion curves of differ ent genes from PTC scan. MAX: Maximum 

NMD efficiency, MIN: Minimum NMD efficiency, I: Inflection point, ER: NMD evasion rate. 

Shaded light ‑gray band: 95% CI across all penultimate ‑exon predictions; dashed black line: 

genome ‑wide median. Solid colored lines: 4PL curves for PTEN (dark blue), TP53 (gold), 

BRCA2 (orange) based on NMDetective -AI predictions; vertical dashed: last exon junction, 

dotted at −55 nt = 55 ‑nt NMD rule. 

# Long -exon rule of NMD escape fully explored and refined by AI and by 

# systematic experiment 

Next, we systematically characteriz ed NMD evasion in long exons, which was discovered in 

our cancer genomics analyses 6 and suggested to act at an approximately 400nt exon length. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

To provide experimental evidence for the long -exon rule and to assess its strength across 

exon lengths and across PTC positions within the exon, we generated a DMS library spanning 

nine exon lengths and 82 PTC positions in BRCA1 exon 10, integrated into a BRCA1 minigene 

construct (Methods, Fig. 5a, Fig. S8). We created nine 5' -truncated versions (125, 250, 500, 

750, 1000, 1500, 2500, 3000, 3426 nt) and introduced stop codons (UAG, UAA, UGA) at all 

VYY codon positions (V = not T/U , Y = C or T) using nicking mutagenesis 45 , yielding 948 

characterized variants. Long -read sequencing achieved high inter -replicate correlation (Fig. 

3d) and coverage (median 155 reads per variant). Validation against Illumina -sequenced (from 

the 50nts rule experiment) overlapping variants (n=21) confirmed assay accuracy (ρ=0.90). 

The mutagenesis data revealed position -dependent NMD evasion for long exons (≥500 nt; 

Fig. 5b), while shorter exons showed minimal evasion (Fig. S8 -10). NMD efficiency increased 

progressively from the 5' to 3' end of exons, consistent with a hypothesized mechanism of the 

decr eased proximity of the stalled ribosome to the EJC (Pearson R=0.47 to 0.65, for 500 to 

1500 bp long exons; Fig. S9b -c). However, the magnitude of this PTC positional effect varied 

substantially by exon length (Fig. 5b, Fig. S8 -10). Line ar models fit on PTC position 

demonstrated that longer exons exhibited weaker positional gradients (smaller slope 

coefficients) but a higher baseline NMD evasion (decreased intercepts meaning overall low 

NMD efficiency irrespective of position). For exons ≥500 nt, regression slopes decreased 

consistently from 0.18 increase in NMD efficiency (on our scale of -0.5 to +0.5) per 100 

nucleotides (at 500nt) to only 0.02 increase per 100 nucleotides (at 3426nt). The intercept 

values (Fig. 5c) - the NMD efficiency at the 3' end of the exon - decreased from 0.8 to -0.2; 

thus, in very long exons, NMD escape is strong and fairly independent of PTC position. This 

effect can also be observed when comparing the same PTC -to -downstream splice site 

distance across exon lengths, which shows a strong exon length effect on NMD, independe nt 

of the PTC -to -downstream splice site distance (Fig. S9a). 

The experimental data also demonstrated agreement with somatic TCGA PTC mutation RNA -

Seq ASE signal in matched exon length categories pooled across different transcripts (Fig. 

5b, Fig. S10). The linear fit to genomic PTCs was an adequate model for DMS measurements 

in exon categ ories with enough data. For 500 nt and 750 nt exons, DMS measurements and 

the linear fit to local NMD efficiency of TCGA mutations correlated at R=0.65 and 0.62, 

respectively. For extremely long 2500 nt exons, agreement was R=0.38, li kely in part due to 

sparse sampling of very long exons in TCGA mutations (119, 163, and 55 PTCs for exon 

length categories 500nt, 750nt, 2500nt respectively). The characteristics of TCGA linear 

models showed similar trends of decreasing slope and intercept values as DMS data (Fig. 5c). 

To achieve comprehensive PTC coverage at nucleotide -resolution, we performed in silico PTC 

scanning with NMDetective -AI across all BRCA1 exon length variants . Predictions captured 

the gradual 5' -to -3' NMD efficiency increase observed in the experimental data, while filling 

the gaps between sparse DMS observations (Fig. 5b, Fig. S10). Linear fits to the predictions 

also exhibited the similar trends across exon length categories up to 1500 nt (Fig. 5c). 

However, in very long exons (≥2500 bp) exhibited a pie cewise NMD efficiency profile (Fig. 5b, 

Fig. S7): NMDetective -AI predicted NMD efficiency increases gradually towards the 3' end of 

exons, with a sudden increase in the last ~1000 nts of the exon. Thus, the genomic data 

suggests that in extremely long exon s, the linear fit of NMD evasion efficiency to the PTC 

coordinate works only within the 5’ -most 1500 nt, after which NMD evasion dwindles. 

Finally, we asked if there exist systematic differences in the long exon NMD patterns across 

the individual genes/exons (Fig. S11). In a genome -wide NMDetective -AI run, we extended in 

silico scanning to 2,171 exons with lengths >400 nt, excluding the first and last two coding 

exons, which have separate NMD -escape mechanisms. Principal component analysis on 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

NMD efficiency curves (50 uniform positions sampled per exon, with interpolation) revealed 

variation in long -exon NMD patterns (Fig. 5d). PC1 explained 86% variance and captured the 

overall magnitude of NMD evasion (Fig. 5e), strongly associating with exon length (Spearman 

ρ= -0.52; Fig. 5f). PC2 (7.8% variance) distinguished between linear -like gradients and 

plateau -like profiles where NMD efficiency saturates in the 3' exon region (Fig. 5e), suggesting 

that some long -exons -- those with extreme PC2 values -- might exhibit some systematic 

differences in NMD for features apart from length itself. Interestingly, PC2 correlated with the 

exon order within the transcript (ρ=0.41; Fig. 5f), suggesting that exons closer to the 3' of 

transcripts exhibit flatter NMD profiles. The PC3 explained considerably less signal (3.5% 

variance) and so we do not further interpret the PC3 or lower -ranking PCs. NMD profiles of 

exons with highest or lowest PC2 values are shown on Fig. 5g, with further example long 

exons shown in the supplementary (Fig. S11) as well as full PC data provided in Table S2. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 5: Systematic analysis of exon length and spatial determinants of NMD 

efficiency. 

(a) Schematic overview of long exon mutagenesis experiment design (V = not T/U, Y = C or 

T) . (b) Comparison of NMD efficiency between DMS long exon experiment (yellow circles) and 

TCGA PTCs (gray squares) across three exon length categories (500bp, 750bp, 2500bp). 

Each panel shows scatter plots with linear regression fits (solid lines) and corre lation 

coefficients. NMDetective -AI predictions shown as crosses. The x -axis shows distance from 

the exon -exon junction (negative values indicate upstream positions) . (c) Linear regression 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

parameters (intercept and slope per 100nt) plotted against exon length for DMS data (yellow 

circles), NMDetective -AI predictions (triangles), and TCGA PTCs (gray squares). Error bars 

show standard errors from the linear models. (d) Principal component anal ysis of long exon 

NMD efficiency curves from genome -wide predictions. PCA scatter plot colored by exon length 

(log scale) with highlighted extreme examples (orange circles) and selected cancer genes (red 

circles). Variance explained by PC1 and PC2 indicate d on axes. (e) Principal component 

loadings showing NMD efficiency curve patterns captured by PC1 -PC2. X-axis shows the 

relative position within exon (0=start, 1=end of exon). (f) Spearman correlation between exon 

features (exon length and exon number) and principal components PC1 -PC2. (g) Example 

NMD efficiency curves for exons at extreme positions along PC1 and PC2 axes, showing 

diverse patterns of NMD evasion across exon positions. The x -axis shows the PTC position 

normalized between the 5’ end of the ex on (x=0) and the 3’ end (x=1). 

# Start -proximal NMD escape rule systematically assessed by experiment 

# exhibits gene -level variation 

After comprehensively characterizing the long -exon NMD evasion, we next turned to address 

the start -proximal NMD evasion rule by combination of experiment and genomic language 

model analyses (Fig. 3b). To study this rule across diverse genetic contexts, we performed 

DMS on 139 genes with high pathogenic nonsense mutation burden, selected from ClinVar 

for genetic disease, and MSK -IMPACT and TCGA databases for somatic PTCs (Fig. 6a). For 

each gene, we designed the non -stop wild -type and the sequence variants with a UAG stop 

codon at every position within the 5' -most 83 amino acids. The library was cloned in a BRCA1 

minigene reporter containing exons 1 -11 and three introns (Fig. 6a). After filtering for 

reproducibility (≥10 reads, mean DimSum error estimate σ>1 across three biological 

replicates), 10,066 variants over 122 genes were retained (91% of library) with good inter -

replicate correlations (ρ≥0.73, Fig. 3e). We further retained only the genes where majority of 

PTCs exhibited expression signal equal to or lower than the wild -type signal (n=100, see 

Methods for all filters , Fig. S12 -S13), and processed observations to harmonize with the scale 

of our NMD efficiency labels (see Methods) . Namely, the NMD efficiency was normalized to 

be highest (i.e. no evasion ; corresponding to +0.5 on our scale ) by considering the 3’ end of 

every gene, under the reasonable assumption that start -proximal NMD evasion ceases after 

approximately 250 nt. Furthermore, based on pooled genomic PTCs (Fig. 6b) we observed 

that the 5’ end evasion is total (corresponding to -0.5 on our scale) and thus rescaled the DMS 

data 5’ end NMD efficiency globally to match that, while maintaining possible inter -gene 

heterogeneity in the degree of 5’ end evasi on (see Methods). To ensure that the minigene 

setup did not cause aberrant splicing and mask nonsense -mediated decay (NMD) effects, we 

utilized SpliceAI 47  to predict potential alternative splice sites within our library. Our analysis 

demonstrated that predicted missplicing was not associated with NMD resistance, confirming 

that our results were not confounded by unstable isoforms (Fig. S15d). 

The experimental data indeed validated the broad relevance of the start -proximal NMD 

evasion rule in this controlled experiment, where most genes show ed NMD activity decreases 

at the 5’ end (Fig. S12). However, casual inspection also revealed gene -to -gene heterogeneity 

in start -proximal NMD evasion profiles (Fig. 6b, Fig. S12 -13), where magnitude and positional 

features varied. Four -parameter sigmoid curves (see Methods) provided adequate fits 

(R²≥0.5) for 80 of 100 genes (median R²=0.71), and their paramet ers showed wide gene -level 

variation: the 5’ NMD efficiency (“Min NMDeff”) ranged from −1.23 to 0.45 (median −0.63), 

and the "Midpoint relative position varied from 0.15 to 1.00 in relative position (median 0.40, 

or about 100 nts). Moving from experiment t o observational, genomic data analysis, LOESS 

fits to start -proximal PTCs from TCGA (n=748, here pooled across genes) also showed similar 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

sigmoid -like NMD efficiency curves; however, sample size did not permit gene -specific 

analysis (Fig. 6b). 

Next, we aimed to summarize the main trends in heterogeneity between genes in start -

proximal NMD escape. A principal component analysis on LOESS -interpolated NMD 

efficiency curves (83 positions × 100 genes) (Fig. 6c) yielded a PC1 (53% variance) that 

prima rily captured overall NMD evasion magnitude, correlating with 5’ -most PTC NMD 

efficiency (Min NMDeff, Pearson R=0.71). Out of the variables we surveyed, the PC2 (23% 

variance) correlated most strongly with the fit quality R² (r=0.63), thereby distinguishin g genes 

where the sigmoid model was inadequate (n=20 genes with R²<0.5) from those well -described 

by it (n=80 genes with R²≥0.5); we do note that the PC1 and PC2 did also correlate to lesser 

extents with other potentially explanatory variables (see Fig. 6d). PC3 (13% variance) 

encapsulated the length of the 5' NMD -evading region, correlating with the Midpoint parameter 

(r=0.58) most strongly of the variables assessed, separ ating start -proximal regions of genes 

with more 5’ versus more 3’ transitions towards the default, NMD triggering state. These 

dominant axes of systematic variation in start -proximal NMD evasion correspond to 

interpretable features of the sigmoid response model (Fig. 6d); conceivably, these may have 

specific biophysical reasons rooted in v ariable efficiency and/or localization of translation 

reinitiation underlying the start -proximal NMD escape. 

Start -proximal NMD evasion quantified genome -wide via computational analysis 

The start -proximal NMD rule was clearly observed in trends extracted from genome analysis: 

NMDetective -AI predictions demonstrated strong agreement with DMS observations for 

individual genes (Fig. 6e). Evaluating model performance systematically across all 100 DMS 

genes (Fig. 6f, Fig. S12), NMDetective -AI achieved median per -gene Pearson R=0.744, 

outperforming our previous rule -based model NMDetective -B, which relies on a binary 

classification rather than local gradients in NMD escape (median R=0.598) , as w ell as 

NMDetective -A (Fig. 6f) .

Next, we explored whether our genomic, sequence -to -function model can be further improved 

by jointly considering DMS data. We fine -tuned NMDetective -AI on the DMS dataset 

(appropriately normalized) using 10 -fold cross -validation, for each individual gene l evel 

assayed in DMS. The specialized model (NMDetective -AI -SP) showed further improvement 

in median per -gene correlation (R=0.797 vs R=0.744 for base model). Thus, the 

experimentally observed start -proximal NMD evasion patterns contain gene -specific signal s

not fully captured by fine -tuning Orthrus on current data, possibly because of noise in training 

data and/or limitations of mRNA sequence representation in the Orthrus neural net 

architecture . This gene -specific signal, however, appears quantitatively modest: a global 

sigmoid -fit (using median parameters across all training genes) achieved median R=0.799, 

while using multiple sigmoids (based on hierarchical grouping of genes by local evasion 

patterns) performed modestly better (median R=0.819). 

This signal is sufficiently robust that hierarchical clustering of sigmoid parameters (Midpoint, 

Steepness, Min and Max NMDeff) can be used to identify three gene categories based on 

evasion patterns (Fig. 6g; all individual gene plots shown in the Fig. S1 2-S13). Cluster 1 (n=47 

genes, e.g. KDM6A, BRCA1, TP53 ) has strong 5’ NMD evasion (median Min NMDeff −0.78), 

high Steepness, and Midpoints in the first half of the profiled region (median relative coordinate 

0.38 (in a theoretical range 0 -1)), representing genes with a sharp and pronounced transition 

from NMD evasion to NMD triggering. Cluster 2 (n=30 genes, e.g. EPHA5 , CDKL5 , TP63 )

showed weaker sigmoid fits (median R²=0.49) and a shallow 5’ evasion patterns (median Min 

NMDeff −0.26), indicating genes where start -proximal NMD evasion is less pronounced and/or 

does not follow a clear sigmoid pattern. Cluster 3 (n=23 genes, e.g. DICER1 , NF2 , MTOR ,

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

STK11 , VHL ) was characterized by Midpoints somewhat shifted away from 5’ end (median 

relative coordinate 0.55, range 0.26 –1.00 ) and lower Steepness, representing genes with 

NMD evasion that extends further into the coding sequence with a more gradual transition. 

Extending predictions genome -wide using NMDetective -AI on 11,321 protein -coding genes 

(see Methods for filters), we classified genes again into three shape categories from the 

parameters of the sigmoid curves fit to predictions (Table S3). The majority of the genes 

(10,142) exhibited typical sigmoid patterns (Fig. S14), with high R² (0.98) and characteristics 

similar to that of Cluster 1 above (Min NMDeff -0.24, Max NMDeff 0.56, high Steepness, 

Midpoint 0.53). The second group ( by numerosity, n=925) showed atypical sigmoids, with 

early Midpoints (0.10), and a continued linear increase of NMD efficiency after the upper 

plateau was reached (Fig. S14). The third group of genes (254) showed little NMD activation 

in the first 250nt (Fig. S14). We note that essent ial and disease -associated genes were 

depleted in this last category OR=0.39 ( p=0.049) and OR=0.63 ( p=0.002), respectively. 

Figure 6: Landscape and predictability of start -proximal NMD evasion. 

(a) Schematic overview of start -proximal mutagenesis experiment design. (b) NMD efficiency 

profiles for genes highlighted in panel (c) as squares in the start -proximal region. DMS 

observations shown as circles with 4 -parameter sigmoid curve fits (solid lin es). Gray dashed 

line shows TCGA genome -wide LOESS fit for context. X -axis shows position in coding 

sequence (nucleotides from start codon). (c) Principal component analysis of start -proximal 

NMD efficiency curves. PC1 vs PC2 scatter plot with selected gen es highlighted (CDKL5, 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

MTOR as colored circles; extreme genes along each axis labeled) and other genes shown in 

gray. LOESS -interpolated fitness values used for PCA. Variance explained by each PC 

indicated on axes. (d) Correlation heatmap showing Spearman correlations between pr incipal 

components (PC1 –PC4) and logistic fit parameters (Min NMDeff, Max NMDeff, Steepness, 

Midpoint) and fit quality (R²). Color scale indicates Spearman correlation coefficient. (e) 

Predicted NMD efficiency profiles for MTOR and CDKL5 genes. Predictions by NMDetective -

AI (blue line), NMDetective -A (dashed orange line), and NMDetective -B (dotted light blue line); 

DMS observations (yellow circles and LOESS curve). (f) Model performance comparison 

across all 100 DMS start -proximal genes. Boxplots show distr ibution of per -gene Pearson 

correlations between model predictions and DMS observations for NMDetective -AI -SP, 

NMDetective -AI, NMDetective -A, NMDetective -B, global sigmoid fit, and cluster -specific 

sigmoid fit. Sigmoid models evaluated using the same 10 -fo ld gene -level cross -validation 

framework as NMDetective -AI -SP. (g) Hierarchical clustering heatmap of genes based on 

standardized 4 -parameter sigmoid fit parameters and fit quality. Genes clustered by Ward's 

method into 3 groups with cluster assignments sh own by color bar. 

# Translation reinitiation promotes NMD evasion at start -proximal gene 

# ends 

As an additional component of our DMS library, we designed variants to systematically test 

the mechanistic hypothesis that translation reinitiation contributes to NMD escape at 5’ gene 

ends. Using the BRCA1 start -proximal gene sequence (previously already used as a start -

proximal reporter 48 ), we designed libraries by applying PTC saturation mutagenesis over the 

5’ -most 83 residues, where each residue was mutated to the three stop types (Fig. 6a, Fig. 

7a). Next, we selected all UGA PTC variants, and, for each, we designed variants by placing 

AUG start codons at different distances downstream (Fig. 7a). Measuring NMD for each UGA 

PTC with or without an AUG methionine downstream (referred to as “AUG” and “non -AUG” 

respectively) enabled us to decoup le the effects on NMD evasion due to proximity t o the 

translation start site (TSS) proximity from translation reinitiation effects. The AUGs were 

introduced at a distance of 1, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70 or 80 residues downstream of the 

PTC, provided that they were within the 83 residues length of th e oligo (Fig. S15a -b). Note 

that all AUGs from the constant part of the reporter (except the first AUG) were replaced by 

CUG, so that AUG -driven evasion from NMD could be attributed only to the library -encoded 

AUGs. In total we measured 1185 variants, with a median coverage of 135 reads per variant 

and highly correlated across replicates (R=0.84 -0.90), using Illumina sequencing. 

Overall, the presence of AUGs downstream consistently increases RNA abundance compared 

to non -AUG variants (2.0 -fold, p<4e -13), suggesting a robust RNA stabilizing effect of 

translation reinitiation (Fig. 7b). For each PTC, the ‘AUG -driven RNA stabilization’ metric 

quantifies the RNA levels increase of the AUG variant compared to their non -AUG counterpart 

(both have the PT C at the same position), hence reporting the AUG effect decoupled from the 

distance -to -TSS effect. The metric shows significant correlati on with two features: distance 

from the PTC to the downstream AUG (intercistronic distance) and PTC position relative to 

TSS (upstream ORF length) (Fig. 7c, Fig. S15b). For variants with the PTC in the same 

position, longer intercistronic distances drive h igher RNA levels, suggesting a stabilizing effect 

(R=0.37, p<2e -16). After controlling for the intercistronic distance, transcripts with longer 

uORF lengths have higher RNA levels (R=0.51, p<2e -16) (Fig. 7c). This is observed for 

intercistronic distances >=10, since shorter intercistronic distances cause very small 

stabilization which likely masks the uORF length effect. Additionally, the similarity of the AUG -

proximal region to the consensus Kozak motif positively correlates with RNA abundance 

(R=0.23, p<3.5e -02), consistent with reinitiation of translation being the stabilizing mechanism, 

presumably via NMD evasion (Fig. 3d). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

We designed the reporter to express an alpha tag encoded at the 3’ end of the transcripts, 

which was used to validate by Western Blot the occurrence of translation reinitiation. We 

detected the presence of shorter protein isoforms arising from translation reinitiation events in 

cells transfected with the full library, which are absent in control cells transfected only with the 

WT (Fig. 3f). Finally, to validate the DMS results, we individually qPCR -quantified the RNA 

abundance of 22 BRCA1 variants spanning the whole dynamic range, obtaining a high 

correlation (r=0.83) (Fig. 3e). 

In summary, our results strongly support translation reinitiation as a mechanism of start -

proximal NMD evasion and further suggest that it is modulated by uORF length, intercistronic 

distance, and the Kozak strength of the AUG -surrounding sequence 

Figure 7: Reinitiation and local sequence -context effects. 

(a) Library design showing the transcript features explored in the library. (b) Horizontal boxplot 

comparing RNA levels between UGA -PTC variants with and without a downstream AUG 

codon; statistical comparison by two -sided t -test. (c) AUG -driven RNA stabili zation (increase 

in fitness relative to the matched AUG -free variant at the same PTC position) as a function of 

the intercistronic distance (codons between PTC and downstream AUG). Boxplots at each 

tested intercistronic distance are overlaid with individua l data points colored by uORF length 

(PTC position). A linear regression line is shown with Pearson r and p-value. For intercistronic 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

distances ≥10, longer uORFs drive greater stabilization than shorter ones at the same 

intercistronic distance. (d) Scatter plot of mean AUG -driven RNA stabilization per AUG 

position plotted against the Kozak sequence similarity score for each position alon g the 

BRCA1 5′ region. Each point represents one unique AUG position; linear regression shown 

with Pearson r and P -value. (e) Scatter plot comparing DMS -measured RNA levels with 

individual qPCR measurements (−ΔCt) for 22 variants spanning the full NMD effi ciency range. 

Pearson r and P -value shown. (f) Western Blot of cells transfected with the WT or the library. 

The smear below the full -length protein band, detected in the library but not in the WT samples, 

belongs to N -terminal truncated isoforms arising from translatio n reinitiation downstream of 

PTCs. (g) Residuals grouped by the codon immediately upstream of the PTC; boxes colored 

by the biochemical property of the encoded amino acid (nonpolar, polar, positively charged, 

negatively charged), with single -letter amino acid annotations below each codon label. (h) 

Effect of mutations at downstream hexamer positions (+1, +2, +3) on RNA levels. Colors 

represent regression coefficients: red indicates higher RNA levels (more NMD), blue indicates 

lower RNA levels (less NMD). (i) Residuals grouped by PTC position (codon number); box 

width scales with the square root of the number of observations per position, and a rolling -

median trend line highlights the overall positional effect. In both panels, the red dashed lin e at 

y = 0 indicates no prediction error; negative values indicate over -estimation and positive values 

indicate under -estimation of RNA levels. 

# Local sequence context effects on NMD 

DMS libraries showed several cases in which NMD levels differed significantly across the three 

stop types. For instance, in the BRCA1 50nt rule library, we detected a stronger NMD for UAG 

in four positions (PTCs in -51/ -49, -57/ -55, -66/ -64 and -141/ -139 n ts, adjusted p < 4e -4), some 

of them with particularly pronounced effects. Other PTCs showed different patterns, including 

cases where UAA drove either the highest or the lowest NMD, UGA drove the lowest NMD, 

or where no significant differences were observed among the th ree stop codons (Fig. S6, Fig. 

S8 -S9, S15a). The lack of consistent stop type effects across positions, suggests that these 

are shaped by the local sequence. 

Consistent with this, we observed a recurrent trend across all DMS datasets where contiguous 

positions show RNA abundance differences consistent with effects of local context (Fig. S6, 

Fig. S8 -S9, S15a). Our start -proximal DMS library contains a considerab le number of data 

points, thus we used it to explore the effects of the PTC -neighboring nucleotides on NMD 

efficiency. For each variant (those that RNA levels lower than wildtype of the same gene) we 

calculated the residuals after regressing out the effect s of the PTC position (from a LOESS fit )

and tested its association with the sequence upstream and downstream of the PTC. The 

downstream trinucleotide showed minor differences (Fig. S15c), whereas the upstream codon 

showed stronger effects, which were largely clustered by the encoded amino acid (Fig . 7g). 

The amino acids G (1.6 -fold decreased RNA levels relative to expected, adjusted p < 2.2e -16) 

and T (1.5 -fold, adjusted p < 2.2e -16) represented the strongest NMD -sensitive context, 

whereas amino acids N an d F (1.3 - and 1.2 -fold increased RNA levels relative to expected; 

respectively, adjusted p < 3e -3) drive the highest NMD evasion; the methionines were not 

assessed for protective effect. This is in overall agreement with a recent study suggesting 

translation dynamics govern NMD, highlighting the NMD -promoting effect of amino acid G 

(glycine) pr eceding the PTC, with T (threonine) showing similar effect 49 . Effects were similar 

across codons, suggesting a largely amino acid -driven mechanism. 

Motivated by these observations, we designed a library to specifically assess the sequence 

NMD effect of the codon upstream and downstream the PTC. We fully randomized hexamers 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

at three different exon 10 positions of our BRCA1 reporter (Fig. 6a). Experiments were 

performed in triplicates (correlations r=0.82 -0.9). For each of the 64 codons, we had variants 

with a PTC upstream or downstream as well as control variants without PTCs, used to control 

for the NMD -independent effect on RNA stability of each codon. We fitted linear models to 

predict RNA abundance based on the codon identity for PTCs (and for non -PTC variants used 

for normalization), separately for the 3 stop types. The n ormalized coefficients capture the 

NMD -dependent effect on RNA abundance of the codons downstream and upstream of the 

PTC. For UAG and UAA stops we did not detect consistent effects across any of the three 

randomized hexamers, but we observed that +1/+3 CU A trinucleotide protects UGA 

transcripts from NMD (Fig. 7h). Out of the 64 codons placed downstream of UGA PTCs, CUA 

is the top -ranked, top -ranked and top four most NMD -resistant contexts across the 3 

randomized hexamers. Readthrough over stop codons inhibits NMD 15,37,50 , and UGACUA is 

the most readthrough sensitive context in humans 51 –53 , suggesting that the observed 

UGACUA NMD escape is due to stop codon readthrough. No upstream codon effects were 

consistently detected for any stop type. 

Lastly, we detected two local features determining RNA levels, shared across genes. First, 

PTCs at position 1 (which prevent translation initiation by destroying the canonical AUG) 

display lower RNA abundance than predicted by the PTC position (LOESS fit) (1.5 -fold, p <

2.2e -16 , Fig. 7i), supporting the association between translation and mRNA stability. Second, 

PTCs at position 2 drive higher RNA levels than predicted via LOESS (1.6 -fold, p < 2.2e -16) 

(Fig. 7h). The effects are strong, and both are the pos itions with the highest observed vs 

predicted error across genes (Fig. 7i). Our data does not distinguish whether the NMD -

protective effects of PTCs at position 2 are due to the PTC position or possibly to the 

methionine codon upstream of the PTC, since we removed the other methionines to pr event 

translation reinitiation. 

# NMD modulates selection on PTC variants in genetic disease and cancer 

To assess how NMD shapes the landscape of pathogenicity of stop -gained variants, we 

analyzed 108,258 rare germline PTCs (allele frequency <0.1% across all gnomAD v4.1 

subpopulations) and subsequently 102,598 somatic PTCs from TCGA whole -genome 

sequencing. Both sets contain a subset of pathogenic PTC variants, in case of gnomAD 

causing genetic disease with recessive mode of inheritance (since the database contains 

individuals without overt phenotypes of genetic disease, dominant acting PTCs are less likely 

to be represented), and in case of TCGA a set of cancer driver somat ic PTCs. We assessed 

the patterns of selection on PTCs in light of their predicted NMD activity -- negative selection 

on germline PTCs in ostensibly healthy individuals, and positive selection on somatic PTCs in 

tumor genomes -- to infer if NMD is protecti ve or NMD is aggravating, when it acts upon 

pathogenic PTCs in a particular gene. Individual examples of both cases were demonstrated 

(reviewed in 33,35,54 ) and our prior genomics analysis on ClinVar 22  suggested that the NMD 

aggravating case may be fairly common across genetic diseases, suggesting opportunities for 

NMD inhibition therapies. Here, we analyze a large population genomics database for 

additional power and moreover apply NMDetective -AI for improved accuracy of NMD 

annotations, to infer selection signatures and prioritize disease genes where NMD activity is 

likely to be pathogenic. 

Germline variants were classified using both established NMD evasion rules and 

NMDetective -AI predictions with thresholds ≤−0.17 for evading, ≥0.43 for triggering, with 

intermediate predictions excluded in this analysis (see Methods, Fig. 8a, and Fig. S16) . Rule -

based classification categorized 47.0% rare gnomAD PTCs as NMD -evading (Fig. 8b), among 

which (Fig. 8c), the largest category was last exon (25.3%), followed by long exon (10.1%), 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

start -proximal (8.2%), and 55 -nucleotide penultimate exon rule (3.4%). NMDetective -AI 

predictions yielded a three -way classification (based on a mixture model of predicted 

probabilities, Fig. 8b): 46.7% triggering, 32.6% evading, and 20.6% intermediate. Co mparing 

AI predictions with rule -based categories, NMDetective -AI confirmed the majority of last exon 

variants as evading but classified only some 55 -nucleotide rule and long exon variants as 

crossing the threshold for the evading category, indicating that classical rules may oversimplify 

interpretation for some variants (Fig. 8c). An additional 729 PTCs classified as NMD -triggering 

by rules were predicted as evading by NMDetective -AI, representing variants whose evasion 

mechanism is not captured by establi shed rules and/or usage of alternative transcripts. We 

note that 208 of these evading cases were located in penultimate exons (outside the final 55 

nt thereof), which we noted previously 22  with unclear mechanism, speculatively relating to 

incomplete occupancy of exon -junction complexes on splice sites. 

Comparing the rare gnomAD variants versus a set of common gnomAD variants (AF ≥0.1% 

in ≥1 subpopulation; n = 2,649) revealed differential selection on NMD categories (Fig. 8d). 

Common PTCs showed a depletion of NMD -triggering variants (42.7% vs 54.0% in ra re; 

Fisher's exact test p = 1.38e -30) and corresponding enrichment of NMD -evading categories, 

particularly last exon variants (36.2% vs 24.1%) and start -proximal variants (9.4% vs 8.2%). 

This indicates that NMD -triggering PTCs are overall under stronger pu rifying selection. 

# Di fferential NMD activity on variants in disease genes can inform clinical 

# decision making 

To assess NMD variant composition in individual disease genes, we analyzed ClinVar disease 

genes with ≥10 unique rare PTCs in gnomAD, using two complementary enrichment tests 

(based on Wald log OR statistical tests, Fig. 8e -f; see Methods). Test 1 compares rare PTC 

allele counts in NMD -triggering versus NMD -evading regions, normalized by synonymous and 

missense allele counts in the same regions; Test 2 compares NMD -triggering versus NMD -

evading region, contrasting rarer versus more common PTCs within each gene. Of 714 tested 

genes, 260 (36%) showed no nominal significance in either tes t (Fig. 8f). Among NMD 

evading -enriched genes (i.e. those where NMD, overall, associates with stronger negative 

selection and we thus infer NMD would aggravate disease phenotype), 167 passed test 1 FDR 

< 1%; as a validation analysis, of these, 56 genes also passed test 2 FDR < 25%. Among the 

converse case of NMD triggering -enriched genes (i.e. those where NMD associates with 

weaker negative select ion, and thus likely alleviates phenotypes), 129 passed test 1 FDR and 

38 genes also passed the test 2 validation thresholds. Considering the genes where both tests 

were significant, among the genes with the largest effect sizes of NMD -triggering depleted 

genes in broadly healthy populations (Fig. 8e), here we highlight CTC1 telomere maintenance 

gene, causing the pleiotropic Coats plus syndrome (log base e OR test 1 = −7.36, FDR 

corrected combined p = 1.4e -98 ), the WRN helicase, causing Werner syndrome adult progeria 

(log OR test 1 = −5.70, FDR corrected combined p = 4.3e -143 ) and CNGB1 retinitis 

pigmentosa disease gene (log OR test 1 = −4.64, FDR corrected combined p = 1.5e -89). 

There were also large effect size genes among NMD triggering -enriched genes (Fig. 8e). Both 

directions of NMD imbalance are broadly represented among known disease genes, with a 

quantitatively higher prevalence of the putatively NMD -aggravatin g genes, suggesting that as 

far as genetic disease goes NMD should not be considered an overall protective pathway. The 

rigorous, two -stage testing setup allowed us to identify individual genes with higher confidence 

in the NMD effect direction (full list in Table S4 ), opening avenues for prioritizing NMD 

inhibition and stop codon readthrough therapies in the corresponding diseases. We noted 

strong agreement between log OR scores from test 1 and test 2 for genes passing the FDR 

criteria (R=0.89), and more moderate agr eement across all tested genes (R=0. 39; Fig. S16), 

likely in part due to statistical power. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Next, we investigated NMD effects on positive selection patterns in somatic mutations, to 

systematically assess the role of NMD in cancer genome evolution. We performed a per -gene 

analysis of somatic PTCs from TCGA whole -exome sequencing, testing enrichment in NMD -

triggering versus NMD -evading regions using variants with NMDetective -AI support, and with 

synonymous variants in the same regions as a local mutation rate control (see Me thods; Fig. 

8g -h). Per -gene estimates were pooled within gene categories usi ng inverse -variance –

weighted meta -analysis (Fig. 8g; see Methods). Tumor suppressor genes (n = 84 genes with 

sufficient data) showed a pooled log OR of 0.52 (95% CI: 0.34 –0.70; random -effects model; p

= 1.3e -8), significantly exceeding the "Other genes" background set (log OR = 0.23; p diff = 

1.4e -3), signaling positive selection for loss -of -function through NMD -mediated transcript 

degradation. Essential genes (n = 227) showed the opposite trend, , with a pooled log OR of 

−0.07 (95% CI: −0.16 to 0.02; p = 0 .11 vs zero), significantly below the "Other genes" 

background ( p diff = 1.9e -10), supporting negative selection against NMD -triggering PTCs that 

would eliminate essential gene function in tumor cells 6. Oncogenes (n = 22) showed no 

significant signal (log OR = 0.06, 95% CI: −0.21 to 0.33; p = 0.67). Using rule -based NMD 

classification alone yielded qualitatively consistent but attenuated results (TSG log OR = 0.39, 

p = 3.5e -7), confirming that relying on NMDetective -AI enriches for bona fide NMD signal. 

At the individual gene level, we computed per -gene log ORs for 178 tumor suppressor genes 

with sufficient somatic PTCs and synonymous variants (Fig. 8h). Of these, 29 showed 

significant NMD category imbalance after FDR correction (Benjamini -Hochberg q < 0. 05): 24 

enriched for NMD -triggering PTCs and 5 enriched for NMD -evading PTCs. The largest effect 

sizes among triggering -enriched genes shown in Fig. 8h were SDHA (log OR = 2.59), RB1 

(log OR = 2.59), MAP2K4 (log OR = 2.52), and KDM5C , all well -established tumor 

suppressors. For these and other similarly enriched genes (Fig 8h), we infer that NMD -

mediated loss of function is a major pathogenic mechanism; the implication is that tumors 

bearing driver mutations in these genes would be prio ritized for applying NMD inhibitors and 

PTC readthrough agents. Among the rarer cases of NMD evading -enriched significant cancer 

driver genes (q < 0.05), the largest effect sizes were observed in tumor suppressors WRN (log 

OR = −2.32), HLA -B (−1.62), PTCH1 (−1.61), and in the common tumor suppressor NF1 ,

suggesting that truncated protein products in these genes may act via dominant -negative 

mechanisms, or, more speculatively, other gain -of -function mechanisms. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 8: Selection of PTCs in germline and soma 

(a) Distribution of NMDetective -AI predictions for rare gnomAD stop -gained variants. A 3 -

component Gaussian mixture model (GMM) is fitted to the predictions; intersection points 

between adjacent components define thresholds separating NMD -evading, intermed iate, and 

NMD -triggering categories (dashed vertical lines). (b) The proportion of NMD -triggering and 

NMD -evading rare PTCs based on established NMD evasion rules (left; for rules see panel c) 

or NMDetective -AI predictions (right). PTCs in the intermediate category fell between the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

GMM -derived thresholds (see Methods). (c) Breakdown of NMD evasion mechanisms among 

rare evading PTCs. Categories: start -proximal (<150 nt from start codon), last exon, 55nt rule 

(≤55 nt from last exon -exon junction), and long exon (>400 nt). Darker region s show the 

proportion confirmed by NMDetective -AI predictions. (d) Comparing the distribution of NMD 

categories between variant types: all rare PTCs, common, and rare PTCs stratified by genetic 

constraint (LOEUF decile 0 –1 vs 2 –9). Fisher's exact test resu lts shown for statistically 

significant differences between NMD groups (shown where p < 0.05). (e) Per -gene (Wald) log 

odds ratio (with 95% CI) of NMD -triggering to NMD -evading allele counts for the top ClinVar 

disease genes most enriched in each direction. For each gene, two bars are shown: Test 1 

(solid; rare PTCs normalized by synonymous and missense allele counts; see Methods) and 

Test 2 (hatched; rare vs common within -gene PTC split). Top 10 triggering -enriched and top 

10 evading -enriched genes selected by combined p value. Positive log OR indicates 

enrichment for NMD -triggering PTCs; negative for NMD -evading PTCs. (f) Summary of NMD 

variant enrichment significance for ClinVar disease genes, separated by direction. Enrichment 

was assessed with two complementary Wald log OR tests (see Methods): Test 1 (T1) 

compares rare PTC allele counts normalized by synonymous allele counts; Test 2 (T2) uses 

a within -gene rare -vs -common PTC split as an internal control. Darker shading indicates the 

FDR -passing fraction, lighter shading the nominally -significant -only fraction. (g) Inverse -

variance –weight ed meta -analysis of per -gene log OR of NMD -triggering to NMD -evading 

somatic PTCs from TCGA. For each category two estimates are shown: rule -based NMD 

classification (filled circles) and rule -based with NMDetective -AI concordance filter (open 

squares). Whi skers show 95% confidence intervals. The gray band indicates the 95% CI of 

the "Other Genes" background. Fixed -effects (FE) or random -effects (RE; DerSimonian -Laird) 

pooling is applied depending on heterogeneity (RE when I² > 50%). (h) Per -gene log odds 

ra tio of NMD -triggering to NMD -evading somatic PTCs (normalized by synonymous burden) 

for individual tumor suppressor genes (MUC4 not shown). Points show Wald log OR with 95% 

CI for genes with nominal p < 0.05. FDR -significant genes (Benjamini -Hochberg q < 0.05) are 

highlighted . Colors indicate direction of selection. Dashed horizontal line at y = 0 represents 

no enrichment. 

# Discussion 

Building on our NMDetective framework 6,22 , which applied genome -wide NMD rules to 

interpret genetic disease and cancer driver mutations (as well as implications of NMD to 

CRISPR editing and cancer immunotherapy), here we move from rule -based annotations 

toward quantitative prediction of variant -specific NMD efficiency. Large -scale genomics 

studies have already shown that the canonical positional rules capture real signal but leave 

substantial unexplained variability 20,24 , which we estimated to be roughly ~1/3 22 . Our results 

suggest that the limitation of prior frameworks is not that the rules are inaccurate or grossly 

incomplete, but that their outcomes are treated as categorical and that their variation across 

genes is not modelled. In our genome -wide analyses and DMS experimental data, the 

classical 50 -nt penultimate exon rule is better represented as a graded transition with a mean 

inflection point close to the classical boundary and showing between -gene heterogeneity. 

Similarly, for the long -exon rule previou s studies inferred a >~400 -nt effect from genomic, 

observational data 6,22  and implemented it as an annotation rule 1,20,23,32 ; our mutagenesis data 

provide direct experimental support and show that exon length and PTC position interact 

quantitatively, with progressive evasion in long exons and increasingly flat, globally weak NMD 

in very long exons. A similar distinction emerges for the start -proximal region NMD escape. 

Early studies of the rule on individual examples of PTCs in disease genes 10 –13 , as well as 

transcriptome -scale analyses 6 supported a broad 5′ escape zone. A recent saturation -editing 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

study on the human LMNA gene 55  suggested that gene -specific boundaries on 5’ evasion 

could be sharp, and averaging over many genes would create a ramp in the overall rule. Our 

multi -gene, comprehensive DMS results are consistent with that interpretation and extend it 

in two ways: first , by showing substantial heterogeneity of start -proximal NMD escape profiles 

across many genes, and second, by directly perturbing translation reinitiation capacity. 

Downstream AUGs increased RNA abundance by about twofold in our reporter, with effects 

dep ending on intercistronic distance, uORF length and Kozak context, and with direct protein 

evidence for downstream reinitiation. 

Our computational model based on neural networks, NMDetective -AI, trained and tested on 

large scale human genomic and transcriptomic datasets, broadly recapitulates these refined 

NMD rules in the penultimate exon 50 nt region, in long exons and also in the start -proximal 

region. For comparison, recent computational models of NMD activity, including our previous 

NMDetective -A/ -B22,32,56  rely on fixed NMD rules based on PTC and transcript features, or a 

regression model fit to the same features. NMDetective -AI instead does not rely on any 

preconceived features, rather it learns them in a de novo, unbiased manner, starting from the 

mRNA se quence and annotations of splice site positions, based on the versatile Orthrus RNA 

foundation model 28 . The contemporary NMDEP method 57  also relies on Orthrus albeit in a 

different way, using neural net -derived sequence representations (embeddings) of mRNA, 

notably concluding they are well predictive only when complemented with curated features 

such as evolutionary conservation, ribosome loading, and known NMD rules. By contrast, our 

results indicate that end -to -end fine -tuning of the Orthrus RNA language model on the full 

transcript sequence and structure, deriving NMDetective -AI, can extract additional quantitative 

signal beyond fixed ru les, supporting nucleotide -resolution, gene -aware prediction. Our study 

shows that a sequence model, when coupled to large -scale experimental validation, can 

capture the local and gene -specific structure of NMD efficiency that hand -crafted features 

necessa rily compress. Immediate sequence context is likely part of that signal, consistent with 

both our own DMS scores residual analysis and two recent experimental studies 49,55 . These 

involve neighboring amino acids and also local readthrough -permissive sequence context as 

NMD modifiers superimposed on positional rules. While their effect is overall subtle, in 

individual examples of PTC the local context may play a substantial role: in our DMS 

experimenta l readouts, neighboring PTC may have variable NMD efficiency in a way that 

reproduces across the different PTC codons, suggesting further local sequence variations 

whose effect on NMD and mechanisms thereof remain to be elucidate d going forward. 

While the neural net model is complex and a “black -box”, the in silico mutagenesis performed 

on NMDetective -AI can be used to generate dense NMD data points, appropriate for deriving 

simple yet accurate models of local NMD efficacy ramps; we demonstrate this via fitting 4 -

parameter logistic curves for individual segmental ru les. These interpretable representations 

of NMDetective -AI may further mechanistic studies, and provide transparency in predictions, 

important for genetic medicine applications. 

More broadly, our study bridges two long -standing views of NMD: a mechanistic framework 

built from gene -specific reporter studies, and a statistical framework derived from population 

and cancer genomics. By combining both with mRNA sequence -based modelling to generate 

the NMDetective -AI, highly accurate NMD predictive model, we show that the classical NMD 

rules remain biologically meaningful but are only approximations to a richer transcript -level 

landscape. This has practical consequences for variant inter pretation and for therapeutic 

stratification, because whether NMD protects from or contributes to disease cannot be inferred 

from the logic of the NMD pathway alone, but needs to be resolved at the level of individual 

genes and variants. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Methods 

# Deep mutational scans - library design and cloning 

50nt rule library 

Oligos were designed to encode all stop codons and tryptophan (UAG, UAA, UGA and UGG) 

substitutions for the 3’ -most 76 amino acid positions of the penultimate exon in BRCA1 and 

ATP7A minigenes, expressed from a mammalian expression vector (pIT078 -BRCA1 and 

pIT078 -ATP7A, Table S5. UGG variants were used as 0% NMD control. BRCA1 mutated exon 

is exon 10, and it’s flanked by a VDJ fragment upstream (to prevent the start proximal NMD 

evasion) and BRCA1 intron 10 and exon 11 downstream (to provide an EJC to trigg er NMD). 

ATP7A minigene contains exons 2 -3, intron 3, exon 4, intron 4 and exons 5 -6, and the library 

covers the 3’ end of exon 4. Oligos were ordered as an oligopool to Twist Biosciences 

containing the variable part (library) and gene -specific flanking co nstant sequences for PCR 

amplification. The oligopool was PCR -amplified for 14 cycles and cloned into pIT078 -BRCA1 

and pIT078 -ATP7A minigenes using Gibson assembly. The library was sequenced with 

Illumina MiSeq 300 paired -end reads. 

Long exon rule library 

We generated nine 5’ truncated versions of BRCA1 exon 10 using Gibson Assembly. Then, 

we used nicking mutagenesis 45  to mutate all VYY (where V=A,C or G, and Y=C or T) codons 

(n=83) to all three stop codons and UGG, yielding a total of 950 variants. UGG variants were 

used as 0% NMD control. Oligos used for nicking mutagenesis were ordered to Integrated 

DNA Technologies (IDT). The library was digested out from the nicking mutagenesis plasmid 

using XhoI and pspOMI restriction enzymes and cloned into the same mammalian expression 

plasmid pIT078. As described above for the 50nts rule experiment, pIT078 drives the 

expression of a minigene with a VDJ fragment upstream of the library to prevent the start 

proximal NMD evasion, as well as BRCA1 intron 10 and exon 11 downstream, to provide an 

EJC binding site to trigger NMD. The library was sequenced with a MinION (ONT, R9.4.1 flow 

cells). 

Start proximal rule libraries 

For the BRCA1 library, oligos were designed as explained in Main text and ordered as an 

oligopool to Twist Biosciences containing the variable part (library) flanked by constant 

sequences for PCR amplification. The oligopool was PCR -amplified for 14 cycles and cloned 

into pIT075 plasmid using Gibson assembly. pIT075 harbors exons BRCA1 2 -11 and introns 

5, 9 and 10 (Fig. 6a). The library covers the 5’ most 83 BRCA1 residues. 

We designed a second library by generating all UAG variants across the 5’ -most 83 residues 

(plus the non -PTC WT) for the 139 genes with highest number of pathogenic nonsense 

mutations in the human population across genetic diseases and cancer (ClinVar, MS K-Impact, 

TCGA). The gene selection process was as follows: genetic disease and cancer germline 

variants were retrieved from the ClinVar database, where all pathogenic nonsense variants 

whose review status was two or more stars were included (n = 3498). So matic cancer variants 

were obtained from MSK -IMPACT and TCGA databases with at least two entries in either 

dataset (n = 2,372). We then clustered variants by gene and selected the 139 genes with the 

highest number of nonsense mutations. The library was clo ned into the BRCA1 minigene (Fig. 

6a). The library was sequenced with Illumina MiSeq 300 paired -end reads. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Library transformation 

Libraries were transformed using Neb10 Electrocompetent bacteria and grown in 100mL 

overnight culture. Library complexity was estimated by plating a small amount of the 

transformation reaction and extrapolating the total number of transformants. Individual clones 

were Sanger sequenced to confirm the expected structure and diversity. 

# Deep mutational scans - sequencing data generation and analysis 

Cell culture and transfection 

HeLa cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS without antibiotics and 

grown at 37ºC at 5% CO2. 3e^ -05 cells seeded in 6 -well plates were transfected with 1 μl 

Lipofectamine 3000, 1 μl P3000 reagent and 150ng of library DNA. 48h later, RNA wa s

harvested using RNeasy (Qiagen). During these 48h the frequency of variants change 

according to their NMD sensitivity. Note that before the library experiment, all NMD reporters 

used in the study were tested with 2 -3 PTCs to ensure they were sensitive to NMD. 

Library preparation for Illumina Sequencing 

RNA was extracted from HeLa cells using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen), eluted in 30ul of MilliQ, 

and treated with TurboDNase (Thermo Fisher) to degrade residual genomic DNA together 

with RNAseIN to prevent the action of RNAses. To avoid freeze/thaw cycles, we pe rformed 

the cDNA synthesis right after. We used 1.5ug of RNA together with a gene -specific primer 

(oIT203, Table S5 ) that anneals at the library -specific 3’UTR to convert the library transcripts 

to cDNA. The cDNA samples are referred to as ‘outputs’, since they belong to the library after 

NMD selection. In parallel, we prepared DNA aliquots from the library MIDIpreps for 

sequencing as inputs. 

We quantified the DNA concentration (plasmid DNA or cDNA, for inputs and outputs; 

respectively) in triplicate by real -time quantitative PCR, using primers that had homology to 

the origin of replication region of the minigene’s plasmids backbone (input) or to 

BRCA1 /ATP7A ORF regions (output). 

A 2 -step PCR using high fidelity Q5 Hot Start High -Fidelity DNA Polymerase (NEB) was used 

to amplify the input and output libraries for sequencing. In PCR1, ~50 million molecules were 

amplified for 15 cycles using frame -shifted primers (to improve sequenci ng performance) with 

overhang homology to Illumina sequencing adapters (oIT_ILL_01/03/07 -12, Table S5). These 

primers were specific to each library, and PCR settings were optimized for each primer pair. 

Then, PCRs were purified using the MinElute PCR Purif ication Kit (QIAGEN) according to the 

manufacturer’s protocol. DNA was eluted in Milli -Q water to a volume of 20ul and quantified 

with Nanodrop. Next, 30ng of PCR1 product was used as template for PCR2. Here, the 

remaining parts of the Illumina adapters we re added to the library amplicon. The forward 

primer (oIT_GJJ_1J) was the same for all samples, while the reverse primer (oIT_GJJ_2J) 

differed by the barcode index. 8 cycles of PCR2s were run at 62ºC of annealing temperature 

and 25 seconds of extension tim e. An aliquot of each PCR2 was run on a 2% agarose gel to 

be quantified. After quantification, samples with different Illumina indexes that were 

sequenced together in the same flow -cell were pooled in an equimolar ratio, run on a gel and 

purified using the QIAEX II Gel Extraction Kit. The purified amplicon library pools were 

subjected to Illumina 300bp paired -end MiSeq sequencing at the CRG Genomics Core 

Facility. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Library preparation for ONT Sequencing 

Due to the amplicon length, the long exon rule libraries were sequenced with ONT, which 

required a different library preparation than Illumina. Variants were grouped by exon length, 

and the experiment was performed independently across groups to prevent length -related 

transfection, purification and PCR biases. Similar to the Illumina -sequenced libraries, RNeasy 

kit (Qiagen) was used to extract RNA and TurboDNase (Thermo Fisher) was u sed to degrade 

residual genomic DNA. 1.5ug of RNA together with a gene -specific primer that anneals at the 

library -specific 3’UTR were used to convert the library transcripts to cDNA. 

Primers targeting the constant sequences flanking the libraries were used to PCR -amplify the 

library transcripts from the plasmid (input, oIT272 -277, Table S5 ) and the cDNA pools (output, 

oIT330 -335, Table S5 ), using an annealing temperature of 67ºC, 4ul of cDNA as template and 

the Q5 Hot Start High -Fidelity DNA Polymerase (NEB). The extension time (30’’ to 6’) and 

number of cycles (21 -24 cycles) were adjusted for each exon length. Primers were barcoded 

to allow demultiplexing of replicates. Samples were pu rified using the QIAEX II Gel Extraction 

Kit and quantified by qPCR. To sequence variants of different lengths in the same run and get 

a homogenous coverage, we pipetted the same number of molecules of each length bin into 

the flow cell. To further control for the amplicon length sequencing bias, we sequenced the 

libraries in two runs: a) exon lengths 125bps -1500bps and b) exon lengths 250 0-3426bps. For 

library prep we used the Ligation Sequencing Kit (SQK_LSK109) according to the 

manufacturer’s protocol, w hich repairs the DNA and attaches the sequencing adapters. Next, 

MinION R9.4.1 flow cells were primed and sequencing lasted for 24h, until getting ~5M reads. 

Inputs and outputs were sequenced separately (total of 4 ONT runs and 2 flow cells, since 

they wer e washed in between runs and reused). 

Sequencing data processing for Illumina Sequencing 

FastQ files from paired -end sequencing of all experiments were processed with DiMSum 

(v.1.3) to obtain the read counts and NMD efficiency for each variant 46 . DimSum applies 

stringent quality filters to discard low quality reads, reads with sequencing errors, etc. to 

ensure that only high -quality reads are used for downstream analysis. Experiments were 

performed in biological triplicates (except for the ATP7A 50 -55nts rule library, which was 

performed in duplicates ), and we retained variants with an average, across all inputs and 

outputs, of >=10 reads for downstream analyses. Increasing the >=10 reads filter did not 

improve inter -replicate correlation. Median coverage in all libraries is >130 reads per variant. 

Also, note that for some libraries, such as the 50 -55 nts and the SPR in 122 genes all variants 

are sequenced with >40 reads. 

In DMS experiments, the enrichment score (ES) for each variant i in replicate r is usually 

defined as the ratio between its frequency before and after selection, where N input and N output 

are the corresponding numbers of sequenced reads in the input and output samples, 

respectively: 

𝐸𝑆 = 𝑁 𝑟 ,𝑖 

> 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡

𝑁 𝑟 ,𝑖 

> 𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡

DiMSum calculates RNA levels scores for each variant i in replicate r as the natural logarithm 

of the enrichment score normalized to the wild -type variant (wt): 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

𝑅𝑁𝐴 𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑠 𝑟 ,𝑖 = 𝑙𝑛 (𝑁 𝑟 ,𝑖 

> 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡

𝑁 𝑟 ,𝑖  

> 𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡

÷ 𝑁 𝑟 ,𝑤𝑡 

> 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡

𝑁 𝑟 ,𝑤𝑡  

> 𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡

)

Errors are estimated by fitting a modified Poisson (count -based) model to the data , with 

replicate -specific multiplicative and additive terms that are common to all variants. Final 

DiMSum RNA levels scores and error estimates for all variants are obtained by merging 

between replicates using weighted averaging, whereby fitness of low -error replicates weigh 

more than high -error replicates. 

Sequencing data processing for ONT Sequencing 

Fast5 files were base called with Guppy 5.0.5 using the ‘hac’ mode and only reads that passed 

the quality filters were retained. Porechop was used to demultiplex the replicates based on 

the replicate -specific barcodes (https://github.com/rrwick/Porechop ). Then, reads were 

mapped to each of the nine exon lengths using the SeqKit package and aligned to the 

reference WT sequences using minimap2. Sam2tsv (Jvarkit) was used to convert the SAM 

alignments to a TAB delimited file, and an in -house script was used to quantify the number of 

full -length reads for each variant. Same as for Illumina libraries, we calculated RNA levels 

scores for each variant i in replicate r as the natural logarithm of the enrichment score 

normalized to the wild -type variant. Experiments were performed in biological triplicates, and 

we retained variants with >=10 reads. 

qPCR 

We used qPCR to validate the DMS results for the start proximal library. Cells were transfected 

with 200ng of the BRCA1 validation colonies (n=22) and 200ng of a transfection control 

plasmid encoding for the VDJ gene. 48h later, RNA was extracted from HeLa cells using the 

RNeasy kit (Qiagen), eluted in 30ul of MilliQ, and treated with TurboDNase (Thermo Fisher) 

to degrade residual genomic DNA together with RNAseIN to prevent the action of RNAses. 

To avoid freeze/thaw cycles, we performed the cDNA synthesis right after. We used 1.5ug of 

RNA together with a gene -specific primer that anneals at the library -specific 3’UTR to convert 

the library transcripts to cDNA. qPCR was run with primers amplifying the VDJ control gene 

and primers amplifying the BRCA1 gene. V DJ was used as a transfection control to normalize 

the BRCA1 signal. 

Western Blotting 

Cells were transfected with 200 ng of either BRCA1 -WT or BRCA1 start -proximal library, 

expressing an alpha -tag at the 3’end of the transcript. 48h later, cells were trypsinized, washed 

with PBS (x3), incubated with lysis buffer (+ protease&phosphatase inhi bitors) and sonicated 

for 5’. 20ul of sample and Laemli loading buffer (3:1) were run on a gel and transferred to a 

nitrocellulose membrane using iBlot. After 1h blocking incubation with 5% Milk in TBS -T we 

incubated overnight with anti -actin (Thermo Fishe r) and anti -alpha tag (FluoTag® -X2 anti -

ALFA, NanoTag) antibodies. The anti -alpha tag membranes were imaged on the Odyssey 

CLx Imager. The actin membrane was incubated for 1h with a secondary antibody and bands 

were imaged on an iBright CL1500 Imaging System. 

# Processing of genomic and transcriptomic data 

Source Datasets 

We obtained premature termination codons (PTC) from nonsense and indel variants with 

allele -specific expression (ASE) measurements from three sources: somatic mutations from 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, 8,786 tumor samples, 31 cancer types), germline variants 

from TCGA (9,752 individuals), and germline variants from the Genotype -Tissue Expression 

(GTEx, 838 individuals, 15,247 healthy samples, 56 tissues) project 42 . For this, we 

downloaded matched tumor and normal WES bam files, along with tumor RNA -seq fastq files, 

from the TCGA consortium via the Genomic Data Commons (GDC) Data Portal 

(https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov ). From GTEx project, we directly obtained WES VCF and ASE 

counts files for the 838 individuals, accessed through dbGaP (via AnVIL, 

https://anvilproject.org/ ), v8 (dated 05 –06 -2017). 

RNA -seq alignment 

We used the same methodologies as in our recent paper 1, here summarized for convenience. 

We processed TCGA RNA -seq data by aligning the reads to the human genome 

GRCh38.d1.vd1 , utilizing STAR v2.5.3a 58 , in adherence to GTEx guidelines 

(https://github.com/broadinstitute/gtex -pipeline/tree/master/rnaseq ). Only RNA -seq reads 

achieving a mapping quality score of at least 255 were kept. We used WASP 59  to correct for 

allele -mapping bias and filter out duplicate reads. 

Variant calling, annotation and ASE quantification 

Variant calling for TCGA whole -exome sequencing (WES) and separately for RNA -seq data 

was performed using Strelka2 v2.9.10 60 . Somatic variants were identified by comparing paired 

tumor and normal BAM files, while germline variants and RNA -seq ASE counts were derived 

solely from normal BAM files, with RNA -seq variant calls forced to match WES -derived calls. 

SNVs and indels were called separately, merged, and processed through an in -house script 

to quantify ASE (available at:  https://github.com/gpalou4/iNMDeff ). All resulting VCFs were 

annotated using ANNOVAR 61  (2020 –06 -07 version, GENCODE v26, ENSEMBL v88), 

incorporating gnomAD 62  for population minor allele frequencies (MAF). For GTEx data, pre -

computed WES VCFs and ASE counts were downloaded directly, converted from GRCh37 to 

GRCh38 coordinates via liftover (excluding regions with poor alignment 63 ), and annotated 

using the identical ANNOVAR pipeline. 

Quantifying raw PTC NMD efficiency 

Raw NMD efficiency was quantified using allele -specific expression (ASE) from RNA -seq 

data. For each heterozygous PTC variant, the ASE -based metric represents the negative log 2

of the ratio in mRNA expression of the mutant (PTC) allele relative to the reference allele. In 

this raw score, 0 indicates no detectable NMD activity, a value of 1 corresponds to a 50% 

reduction in mRNA level, while a complete heterozygous mRNA degradati on approaches 

infinity. Raw NMD scores were further processed before training, s ee later. 

Filtering and processing of variants - shared filters 

Somatic and germline mutations from the TCGA dataset, alongside germline variants from the 

GTEx project, were processed using a unified filtering framework (Supp. Fig. 1) with cohort -

specific adaptations. Across all three datasets, samples exhibiting extreme mutational burden 

ratios (a nonsense -to -indel or deletion -to -insertion ratio > 10 or < 0.1) were excluded. 

Transcripts were assigned a priority score based on ENSEMBL Transcript Support Level 

(TSL) and MANE main isoform status (1: TSL = 1 and MANE; 2: T SL = 1, non -MANE; 3: TSL 

> 1, MANE; 4: all others), retaining only transcripts with a priority score ≤ 3. To isolate true 

NMD effects, PTCs with conflicting classifications across multiple transcripts due to alternative 

UTR structures were removed. For var iants overlapping multiple transcripts, a single 

representative transcript was selected based on the previous priority hierarchy (TSL/MANE 

score = 1). Similarly, we excluded PTCs that manifested as missense, synonymous, or non -

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

coding UTR mutations in alternative transcripts due to differing reading frames. Frameshift 

indels lacking a predicted downstream PTC were discarded. To prevent confounding effects 

from multiple truncating mutations, variants were excluded if the patient h arbored an additional 

germline loss -of -function variant (nonsense, frameshift indel, or splice site variant) within the 

same gene. We also removed variants occurring in single -exon genes – unless they contained 

a 3' UTR splice site – as these typically eva de canonical NMD. Only heterozygous variants 

were retained to ensure clear allele -specific analysis. Finally, variants resulting in undefined 

(NA) or infinite values during NMD efficiency calculations due to insufficient RNA -seq 

coverage were removed. 

Filtering and processing of variants - dataset specific filters 

Depending on the dataset, specific filters were applied or omitted to account for variant origin 

and tissue context. For both TCGA datasets (somatic and germline), PTCs occurring within 

multi -nucleotide variants (MNVs) were excluded to prevent "MNV rescue" where an adjacent 

mutation neutralizes the stop -gain effect. Furthermore, PTCs overlapping somatic focal copy 

number alterations (absolute GISTIC score > 0.1) were excluded to prevent copy number 

artifacts from confounding expression calculations. Both th e MNV and CNA filters were 

omitted for the GTEx dataset. To guarantee high -confidence calls for tumor -specific mutations, 

the somatic TCGA pipeline filtered out variants with a DNA VAF < 0.2. This DNA VAF filter 

was omitted for both the TCGA and GTEx germl ine datasets. Expression -based filtering was 

applied across all datasets to ensure robust baseline expression for ASE analysis. For the 

germline datasets, transcripts with low expression (median mRNA expression < 5 TPM) or 

high variance (coefficient of var iation [CV] > 0.5) were removed at this stage. Because the 

Somatic TCGA cohort served as the training dataset, these expression filters were applied in 

a subsequent processing step utilizing less stringent thresholds (TPM < 1 and CV > 1). 

Furthermore, comm on PTCs (MAF > 0.1%), singletons (MAF = 0.0%) and PTCs within 3 

nucleotides of splice sites were excluded. 

Additional preprocessing before modeling 

We performed further filtering and preprocessing steps on the initial NMD dataset, before 

model training. For germline datasets, variants overlapping with somatic TCGA PTCs were 

removed using both genomic coordinates and transcript sequences to ensure test set 

independence. Additional filtering based on transcript expression and variation were used for 

PTCs on validation chromosomes (TPM ≥5.0, CV ≤0.5). 

To isolate sequence -dependent NMD effects from biological and technical confounders, we 

performed linear regression correction separately for stopgain and frameshift variants. 

Predictor variables consisted of the first four principal components (PC1 –PC4) d erived from 

tissue -specific RNA -seq gene expression data, the first principal component (PC1) of mRNA 

half -lives from multiple experimental studies 64 , and expression metrics (median TPM, CV). 

Missing RNA half -life values were imputed with the dataset median. Frameshift -induced PTCs 

were corrected using a two -stage adjustment to match stopgain variant levels. 

Variants sharing identical characteristics (gene, transcript, position, sequences, stop codons, 

rule labels) i.e. recurrent observations of the same PTC event across samples were 

aggregated using median NMD efficiency. Extreme values (|NMDeff| > 4.0) and t ranscripts 

exceeding 20,000 nucleotides were filtered from training data. NMD efficiency values were 

normalized using a linear transformation where the center point was the midpoint between 

mean NMD -triggering and mean last -exon variant efficiency, and the scale was their 

difference, in essence setting the value of full NMD triggering to 0.5, and full NMD evasion to 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

-0.5. Normalized values were clipped to [-2, 2]. This normalization was performed 

independently for each dataset. 

For each variant, sequences were encoded as 6-track one -hot representations: four 

nucleotide tracks (A, C, G, T), one CDS track marking codon boundaries, and one splice site 

track indicating exon -exon junctions. All preprocessing configurations and statist ics were 

saved for reproducibility. The 3' and 5' UTRs for each transcript were obtained using the 

Genome kit library with Gencode v26. 

Harmonizing DMS datasets with large -scale genomic data 

DMS datasets required specialized preprocessing to align experimental fitness measurements 

with TCGA NMD efficiency scales. 

Penultimate exon dataset 

Variants with DimSum σ > 0.15 or RNA abundance levels < −2 were removed. Fitness values 

were mean -centred and inverted for visualization purposes. Normalization was performed to 

the mean and standard deviation of NMDetective -AI predictions in the same regions of the 

same genes for visualization (Fig. 4b -c). Two genes were inclu ded: BRCA1 

(ENST00000357654.7) and ATP7A (ENST00000341514.10). 

Long exon dataset 

Measurements were first mean -centred, and values outside [−1, 1] were excluded. Fitness 

was inverted (NMDeff = −fitness) with no further normalization for visualizations only. Target: 

BRCA1 (transcript ENST00000357654.7, exon 10). 

Start -proximal exon dataset 

Variants with DimSum σ > 1, and variants with |measurements| > 3 were dropped. Genes 

where >50% of variants had higher fitness than the wild -type measurement were discarded 

as likely confounded, as were genes with fewer than 50 remaining variants. RNA leve l was 

inverted to yield NMDeff (NMDeff = −fitness). Normalization proceeded in two steps: first, for 

each gene, the maximum rolling median across the top -15 3′ -most variants (in three groups 

of 5 variants) was shifted to +0.5 (the expected 3′ NMD -evading anchor ); second, a global 

linear scaling was applied, anchored at +0.5 on the 3′ end, to match a target 5′ median of −0.5. 

Variants mapping to last -exon positions were excluded. 

# Model development and training 

Model architecture 

NMDetective -AI is a deep learning model that combines the pretrained genomic foundation 

model Orthrus with a regression head for sequence -based prediction of NMD efficiency. The 

model is trained end -to -end, with no frozen components. The architecture consi sts of: 

Encoder: We used Orthrus 28  through HuggingFace 

(https://huggingface.co/antichronology/orthrus ), a Mamba -based mature RNA foundation 

model with approximately 10 million parameters, pretrained on over 45 million mature RNA 

transcripts from mammalian organisms. Orthrus encodes full -length transcript sequences into 

512 -dimensional embedding vectors th at capture functional and evolutionary relationships 

across sequences. The model processes input sequences in a 6 -track one -hot encoding 

format: four nucleotide tracks (A, C, G, T/U), one coding sequence (CDS) track marking exon 

boundaries, and one splice site track indicating exon -exon junctions. We generate 

representations using mean pooling over the sequence length. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Regression Head: The Orthrus embeddings are passed through a deep neural network 

consisting of two fully connected layers (256 and 64 neurons) with GELU activation functions, 

layer normalization after the first layer, and dropout regularization. The final layer outputs a 

single scalar value representing predicted NMD efficiency. Weight initialization for the 

regression head used Xavier uniform initialization for linear layers, with biases initialized to 

zero. All models were implemented in PyTorch 65 .

Hyperparameter optimization 

Hyperparameter optimization was performed using Bayesian optimization via Weights & 

Biases (W&B) 66  sweep with 42 instances. The hyperparameter search space included: 

● Learning rate: [0.00001, 0.00005, 0.0001, 0.001] 

● Weight decay (head): [0, 1e -5, 1e -3] 

● Weight decay (encoder): [0, 1e -5, 1e -3] 

● Learning rate decay gamma: [0.9, 0.95, 0.99] 

● Gradient accumulation steps: [8, 64, 256] 

● Regression head architecture: [[256, 64], [512, 256, 128, 64], [1024, 512, 256, 128, 

64]] 

● Dropout: [0.0, 0.1, 0.2] 

● Gradient clipping norm: [1.0, 2.0, 3.0] 

● Warmup steps: [50, 100, 10000] 

● Encoder version: [standard Orthrus, MLM -pretrained Orthrus] 

● Activation function: [ReLU, GELU] 

● Layer normalization: [True, False] 

● Loss function: [MSE, Huber] 

● Huber delta: [0.5, 1.0, 2.0] 

The optimization objective was to minimize validation loss. The best -performing configuration 

was selected based on validation set performance. Logs for the sweep can be viewed at 

https://wandb.ai/irb -gds/NMD/sweeps/xzhwjczx .

Training strategy 

The final NMDetective -AI model was trained in the following manner. 

Optimization: Models were trained using AdamW 67  optimizer with separate weight decay 

parameters for the encoder (0.001) and regression head (0.0). Gradient clipping was applied 

with a maximum norm of 3.0. 

Training Configuration: Training used a batch size of 1 with gradient accumulation over 256 

steps, yielding an effective batch size of 256. The model was trained for a maximum of 300,000 

steps with evaluation performed every 1,024 steps. Huber loss (delta= 0.5) was used as the 

training objective. Early stopping was implemented with patience of 50 evaluation steps 

without improvement in validation loss. 

In addition, we evaluated three training strategies to assess the contribution of pretrained 

Orthrus representations: (1) NMDetective -AI: full fine -tuning of the entire model including the 

encoder, (2) linear probing with frozen encoder weights training on ly the regression head, and 

(3) random initialization of the encoder without pretraining. When training models (2) and (3) 

the same configurations were used. Logs for trained models can be inspected at 

https://wandb.ai/irb -gds/NMD .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Other statistical analysis 

In silico PTC scan experiments 

To systematically evaluate NMDetective -AI predictions across transcript sequences, we 

performed in silico saturating mutagenesis experiments. For selected transcripts, we 

computationally introduced premature termination codons at positions of interest with in the 

coding sequence by replacing codons with stop codons (UAG, UGA, or UAA). For each 

variant, the full -length mutated transcript sequence was encoded in 6 -track format and passed 

through NMDetective -AI to generate NMD efficiency predictions. This appro ach allowed 

comprehensive profiling of positional effects on NMD across parts of or entire transcripts, 

enabling comparison with experimentally measured deep mutational scanning data and 

validation of model predictions across diverse sequence contexts. 

Reimplementing NMDetective -A and NMDetective -B

To compare NMDetective -AI with previous approaches, we reimplemented NMDetective -A

and NMDetective -B using our normalized NMD efficiency labels. NMDetective -A is a Random 

Forest regressor (100,000 trees, max_features=1) trained on seven hand -crafted featur es: 

InLastExon (boolean), 50ntToLastEJ (boolean), DistanceToStart (capped at 1000 nt), 

ExonLength, PTC_EJC_dist (distance to downstream exon -exon junction), 

DistanceToWTStop, and RNAHalfLife. NMDetective -B is a decision tree with fixed branching 

structure based on four features (InLastExon, DistanceToStart <150 nt, ExonLength >407 nt, 

50ntToLastEJ), where leaf node values are computed as mean NMD efficiency from training 

data for variants matching each decision path. We also evaluated NMDetective -B with ori ginal 

fixed leaf values from the published model. All features were pre -computed during the 

preprocessing pipeline described above. 

Measuring inter -replicate correlation 

To assess measurement reproducibility, we performed split -half reliability analysis on PTCs 

with multiple biological replicates (≥3 independent samples with the same PTC). For each 

PTC, replicates were randomly divided into two groups, and mean NMD efficie ncy was 

calculated per group. Spearman correlation was computed across all PTCs between the two 

group means. This random splitting was repeated 100 times to obtain robust estimates of 

reproducibility. The analysis was performed separately for NMD -triggerin g variants (meeting 

none of the escape rules) and NMD -evading variants (meeting at least one escape rule). To 

compare measurement consistency across cohorts, we calculated correlations between ASE 

measurements for the same PTCs appearing in different datas ets (somatic TCGA vs germline 

TCGA, somatic TCGA vs GTEx). 

Fitting LOESS, and four -parameter logistic curves 

LOESS (locally weighted scatterplot smoothing) was used to fit smooth curves to positional 

NMD efficiency data. For DMS start -proximal analysis, LOESS curves (frac = 0.3) were fitted 

per gene to NMD efficiency as a function of PTC position, then linearly i nterpolated at 83 

uniformly spaced positions (1 –83 codons from the start, corresponding to CDS positions 3 –

249 nt), creating a gene × position matrix used as input for PCA and hierarchical clustering. 

For the penultimate exon normalization (DMS PE dataset) , LOESS was applied with frac = 0.4 

to align DMS and TCGA PTC distributions. 

Four -parameter (Log -)logistic (4PL) curves were fitted to characterize the relationships in the 

penultimate exon data (genome -wide predictions). The 4PL function is defined as: 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

𝑦 = 𝐷 + 𝐴 − 𝐷 

1 + (𝑥 / 𝐶 )𝐵 

where A is the minimum asymptote, D is the maximum asymptote, C is the inflection point, 

and B is the slope factor. x was normalized to [0, 1] for numerical stability. Curve fitting used 

`scipy.optimize.curve_fit` with Levenberg –Marquardt, starting from da ta -derived initial 

guesses, with a maximum of 20,000 function evaluations. 

Boltzmann sigmoid or logistic curves of the form: 

𝑦 = 𝐴 + 𝐾 − 𝐴 

1 + 𝑒 −𝐵 (𝑥 − 𝑀 )

where A is the lower asymptote, K is the upper asymptote, B is the growth rate, and M is the 

midpoint (inflection point), were fitted to DMS start -proximal data on a per -gene basis. x was 

scaled to [0, 1] prior to fitting. Bounded least -squares optimizatio n with a soft -L1 loss function 

(f_scale = 0.5, max_nfev = 40,000) was used via `scipy.optimize.least_squares`. Orientation 

of the sigmoid (increasing vs. decreasing) was detected from the data and used to initialize 

parameters. Genes for which fitting fail ed were excluded from downstream sigmoid -based 

analyses. Goodness of fit was assessed by R². 

For the long exon dataset, multiple curve models were compared per exon: linear, 4 -parameter 

logistic, and polynomials of degree 2 –5, each normalizing x to [0, 1]. Model selection used the 

Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). Exons with a negative linear slope (decreasing NMD 

efficiency towards the 3′ end of the exon) were excluded from PCA. 

Principal component analysis 

For start -proximal DMS, PCA was applied to the gene × position LOESS -interpolated matrix 

(83 positions, see above). Each position (feature) was standardized by z -score normalization 

(zero mean, unit variance; `StandardScaler`) across genes before PCA. The resulting principal 

components capture gene -level variation in the shape of the NMD efficiency profile across the 

first 83 PTC positions. 

For long exon data, PCA was applied to interpolated NMD efficiency curves from long exons 

(>400 nt, excluding first, last, and penultimate coding exons). For each exon, predictions were 

linearly interpolated at 50 uniformly spaced relative positions (0 –1 within the exon). Exo ns with 

fewer than 5 data points or with invalid (NaN/Inf) interpolated values were excluded. Features 

were z -score normalized before PCA. Three principal components were retained. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Hierarchical clustering of start -proximal genes 

Ward -linkage hierarchical clustering was applied to the sigmoid parameters (A, K, B, M, R²) 

derived from per -gene 4 -parameter sigmoid fits (see above). Outlier genes ( FAT1 ) were 

removed prior to clustering. Parameters were z -score standardized before computing the 

Euclidean distance matrix. The optimal number of clusters was evaluated by silhouette score 

for k = 2 –7; k = 3 was selected. The same clustering approach was appl ied to genome -wide 

start -proximal predictions, using sigmoid parameters fitted to NMDetective -AI predictions at 

positions 1 –83 codons. Genes were retained for genome -wide clustering only if they had at 

least 10 data points in the start -proximal window, a f irst CDS exon ≤ 400 nt, a CDS ≥ 500 nt, 

and the start -proximal window did not reach within 55 nt of the last exon junction. Cluster 

enrichments for gene categories (essential genes, tumor suppressors, oncogenes, disease 

genes) were assessed by Fisher's exa ct test. 

SpliceAI scores 

We used SpliceAI to predict splicing site donors and acceptors along the full transcripts (2958 

nts), comprising the variable (library) and constant ( BRCA1 ) parts. SpliceAI outputs a donor 

and acceptor likelihood for each position of the transcript. It correctly predicted the three splice 

events in the constant part of the transcript, validating the analysis. For a minority of genes, it 

also predicted some s plice sites within the library. To check whether these genes were 

enriched in the NMD -resistant group of genes we computed the SpliceAI score, which results 

from summing the splice site likelihood over all library nucleotides. This metric represents a 

likelihood of observing alternative splice events involving library nucleotides. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Selection in germline and soma 

Germline variant data and NMD classification 

Stop -gained variants from gnomAD v4.1 (https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/news/2024 -04 -

gnomad -v4 -1/ ) were annotated with NMD status categories. Rare germline variants were 

defined as those with allele frequency (AF) < 0.1% across all gnomAD subpopulations 

(African, Latino/Admixed American, Finnish, Non -Finnish European, East Asian), while 

common variants had AF ≥ 0.1% in at least one subpopulation. Only PASS -filtered variants 

with VEP stop_gained annotations in MANE Select transcripts were retained. Variants were 

classified as NMD -evading if they met any of four criteria: within the first 150 coding 

nucleo tides from the start codon (start -proximal), within 55 nucleotides upstream of the last 

exon -exon junction (55 -nucleotide rule), within the last coding exon, or within an exon longer 

than 400 nucleotides (long exon). Variants meeting none of these criteria were classified as 

NMD -triggering. 

Optimizing NMDetective -AI prediction thresholds 

For NMDetective -AI -based classification, NMDetective -AI predictions were generated for all 

variants using full -length transcript sequences encoded as 6 -track representations (see 

above) obtained via GenomeKit (GENCODE v47). To establish thresholds for bina rizing 

predictions, a 3-component Gaussian mixture model (GMM) was fitted to prediction 

distributions from rare gnomAD variants using scikit -learn's GaussianMixture with full 

covariance. The three components correspond to NMD -evading, intermediate, and NMD -

triggering categories. Thresholds were defined as the intersection points between adjacent 

Gaussian components, computed by finding the roots of the difference between weighted 

probability density functions using Brent's method. This yielded thresholds of −0.17 (evading 

vs intermediate) and 0.43 (intermediate vs triggering). Variants with predictions in the 

intermediate range were excluded from binary classification analyses. 

Per -gene NMD variant composition in germline 

Gene -level log odds ratios were calculated as log e[(N_triggering + 1) / (N_evading + 1)], where 

pseudocounts avoided division by zero. Genetic constraint was assessed using LOEUF (loss -

of -function observed/expected upper bound fraction) deciles from gnomAD, with highly 

constrained genes defined as LOEUF d ecile 0 –1. 

To assess NMD variant enrichment in ClinVar disease genes, two complementary Wald log 

OR tests were computed per gene (with Haldane -Anscombe 0.5 pseudocounts). Test 1 (T1) 

compares rare PTC allele counts in NMD -triggering versus NMD -evading regions, normalized 

by synonymous (plus missense) allele counts in the same regions, restricted to PTC variants 

with AF ≤ 1% to avoid extreme -AF variants dominating. Test 2 (T2) provides an internal 

control: within each gene, PTC variants are ranked by AF and split at th e gene -level median 

into a rarer half and a more common half; the 2×2 table compares NMD -triggering versus 

NMD -evading counts in rare versus common within -gene halves. A combined p-value was 

derived via Fisher's method (−2·Σ log(p) ~ χ² (4)). P -values for each test were corrected 

independently using Benjamini -Hochberg FDR. Only disease genes with ≥10 unique PTC 

variants and non -zero synonymous counts in each NMD region were included . Genes were 

considered robustly enriched when passing T1 FDR < 1% and T2 FD R < 25%. 

Somatic PTC analysis: gene -category meta -analysis 

To investigate selection patterns in somatic mutations, we analyzed somatic PTCs from TCGA 

~17k whole -genome sequences (v43) alongside synonymous variants from the same samples 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

as a mutation -rate control. Variants were classified into NMD -triggering and NMD -evading 

regions using the same rule -based criteria as for germline variants. Synonymous variants were 

assigned NMD status based on their genomic position relative to the same exon boundaries 

(i.e., whether a hypothetical PTC at that position would be NMD -triggering or NMD -evading), 

providing a positional control for regional mutation rate variation. For each gene, a 2×2 

contingency table was constructed: 

NMD -triggering  NMD -evading 

PTCs  a b

Synonymous  c d

A Wald -adjusted log odds ratio was computed as loge OR = log e[(a + 0.5)(d + 0.5) / (b + 0.5)(c 

+ 0.5)], where a pseudocount of 0.5 was added to all cells. The standard error was estimated 

as SE = √(1/(a+0.5) + 1/(b+0.5) + 1/(c+0.5) + 1/(d+0.5)), and a two -sided z -test yielded the 

per -gene P -value. Positive log OR in dicates that PTCs in that gene are disproportionately 

concentrated in NMD -triggering positions relative to what synonymous mutations would 

predict, consistent with positive selection for NMD -medi ated loss of function. 

Genes were assigned to four categories: tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) and oncogenes 

(OGs) from curated lists of mutational cancer drivers 68,69 , essential genes from 70 , and other 

genes. To ensure a clean background set for comparisons, "Other Genes" excluded all genes 

appearing in any row of the cancer gene census (not only common drivers) and all genes with 

disease associations in the NCBI gene_condition_source_id file 

(https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/clinvar/gene_condition_source_id ). Only genes with ≥10 

PTCs and ≥5 synonymous variants were included. 

Per -gene log ORs within each category were pooled using inverse -variance –weighted fixed -

effects meta -analysis. Heterogeneity was assessed by Cochran's Q statistic and I². When 

substantial heterogeneity was detected (I² > 50%), a DerSimonian -Laird random -ef fects model 

was used instead. Each category was compared against the "Other Genes" background via a 

z-test on the difference of pooled log ORs, with SE computed as √(SE²_category + SE²_other). 

As a sensitivity analysis, the classification was repeated with an NMDetective -AI filter. For 

each gene with ≥10 PTCs with NMDetective -AI predictions, a two -component GMM was fitted 

to the predictions to find a gene -specific decision boundary (the predicti on value where both 

components had equal posterior probability). Variants where NMDetective -AI prediction 

disagreed with the rule -based classification (NMDetective -AI says triggering but rules say 

evading, or vice versa) were marked as unknown and excluded . This filter removes ambiguous 

variants to test whether the selection signal is robust to classification uncertainty. 

Per -gene analysis of individual cancer genes 

For individual cancer gene analysis, the same Wald log OR approach was applied to each 

tumor suppressor gene (including both common and rare mutational drivers). Genes with ≥3 

unique PTCs and ≥3 synonymous variants in each NMD region were retained. P-values were 

corrected for multiple testing using Benjamini -Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR). Genes 

with FDR < 0.05 were considered significant. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Code and data availability 

All the code related to training NMDetective -AI, dataset processing, downstream analysis, and 

generating figures of this article can be found at  https://github.com/Vejni/NMDetectiveAI .

Model weights , analyzed datasets and source data files for all figures can also be downloaded 

from the same repository. Filtered and processed PTC variants and NMD efficiency estimates 

are available upon request. Precomputed NMDetective -AI predictions for all stop -gain 

mutations along the longest transcripts of each gene can be found on the above repository. 

# Acknowledgements 

M.V. was supported by a fellowship from the ”la Caixa” Foundation (ID 100010434, with 

fellowship code B006197). G.P. -M. was funded by an AGAUR FI fellowship. 

Work in the lab of F.S. is supported by an ERC StG “HYPER -INSIGHT” (757700), an ERC 

Consolidator Grant “STRUCTOMATIC” (101088342), Horizon2020 RIA project “DECIDER” 

(965193), Horizon Europe project “LUCIA” (101096473), Spanish government project 

“REPAIRSCA PE”, CaixaResearch project “POTENT -IMMUNO” (HR22 -00402), a Novo 

Nordisk Fonden “Start Package” grant, the Danish Cancer Society grant "AI -DRIVERS" and a 

DFF Project2 (5243 - 00072B), the SGR funding of the Catalan government, and the Severo 

Ochoa Centers of Excellence award of the Spanish government to the IRB Barcelona. 

Work in the lab of B.L. was funded by European Research Council (ERC) Advanced (grant 

883742),  Wellcome (220540/Z/20/A),  the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation 

(PID2023 -146685NB -I00 , EMBL Partnership, Severo Ochoa Center of Excellence), Agencia 

de Gestio d’Ajuts Universitaris i de Recerca (AGAUR,  2021 -SGR -01226 ) and the CERCA 

Program/Generalitat de Catalunya. 

LLM -assisted tools were used for language editing of manuscript text. The results published 

here are in whole or part based on data generated by the TCGA Research Network 

(https://www.cancer.gov/tcga ). 

# Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

# References 

1. Palou -Márquez, G. & Supek, F. Variable efficiency of nonsense -mediated mRNA decay 

across human tissues, tumors and individuals. Genome Biol. 26 , 316 (2025). 

2. Sun, B. & Chen, L. Mapping genetic variants for nonsense -mediated mRNA decay regulation 

across human tissues. Genome Biol. 24 , 164 (2023). 

3. Tani, H. & Akimitsu, N. Genome -wide technology for determining RNA stability in 

mammalian cells: Historical perspective and recent advantages based on modified 

nucleotide labeling. RNA Biol. 9, 1233 –1238 (2012). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4. Weischenfeldt, J. et al. Mammalian tissues defective in nonsense -mediated mRNA decay 

display highly aberrant splicing patterns. Genome Biol. 13 , R35 (2012). 

5. Nagy, E. & Maquat, L. E. A rule for termination -codon position within intron -containing 

genes: when nonsense affects RNA abundance. Trends Biochem. Sci. 23 , 198 –199 (1998). 

6. Lindeboom, R. G. H., Supek, F. & Lehner, B. The rules and impact of nonsense -mediated 

mRNA decay in human cancers. Nat. Genet. 48 , 1112 –1118 (2016). 

7. Le Hir, H. The exon -exon junction complex provides a binding platform for factors involved 

in mRNA export and nonsense -mediated mRNA decay. EMBO J. 20 , 4987 –4997 (2001). 

8. Zhang, J., Sun, X., Qian, Y., LaDuca, J. P. & Maquat, L. E. At Least One Intron Is Required for 

the Nonsense -Mediated Decay of Triosephosphate Isomerase mRNA: a Possible Link 

between Nuclear Splicing and Cytoplasmic Translation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18 , 5272 –5283 

(1998). 

9. Rivas, M. A. et al. Effect of predicted protein -truncating genetic variants on the human 

transcriptome. Science 348 , 666 –669 (2015). 

10. Sánchez -Sánchez, F. et al. Attenuation of disease phenotype through alternative translation 

initiation in low -penetrance retinoblastoma. Hum. Mutat. 28 , 159 –167 (2007). 

11. Neu -Yilik, G. et al. Mechanism of escape from nonsense -mediated mRNA decay of human 

β-globin transcripts with nonsense mutations in the first exon. RNA 17 , 843 –854 (2011). 

12. Inácio, Â. et al. Comment on ‘Nonsense -mediated mRNA decay modulates clinical 

outcome of genetic disease’. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 15 , 533 –534 (2007). 

13. Zhang, J. Evidence that translation reinitiation abrogates nonsense -mediated mRNA decay 

in mammalian cells. EMBO J. 16 , 826 –833 (1997). 

14. Silva, A. L., Ribeiro, P., Inácio, Â., Liebhaber, S. A. & Romão, L. Proximity of the poly(A) -

binding protein to a premature termination codon inhibits mammalian nonsense -mediated 

mRNA decay. RNA 14 , 563 –576 (2008). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15. Hogg, J. R. & Goff, S. P. Upf1 Senses 3′UTR Length to Potentiate mRNA Decay. Cell 143 ,

379 –389 (2010). 

16. Eberle, A. B., Stalder, L., Mathys, H., Orozco, R. Z. & Mühlemann, O. Posttranscriptional 

Gene Regulation by Spatial Rearrangement of the 3′ Untranslated Region. PLoS Biol. 6, e92 

(2008). 

17. Inácio, Â. et al. Nonsense Mutations in Close Proximity to the Initiation Codon Fail to Trigger 

Full Nonsense -mediated mRNA Decay. J. Biol. Chem. 279 , 32170 –32180 (2004). 

18. Perrin -Vidoz, L. The nonsense -mediated mRNA decay pathway triggers degradation of most 

BRCA1 mRNAs bearing premature termination codons. Hum. Mol. Genet. 11 , 2805 –2814 

(2002). 

19. Kerr, T. P., Sewry, C. A., Robb, S. A. & Roberts, R. G. Long mutant dystrophins and variable 

phenotypes: evasion of nonsense -mediated decay? Hum. Genet. 109 , 402 –407 (2001). 

20. Iha, H., Kikutake, C. & Suyama, M. Integrative and accurate annotations enhance current 

nonsense -mediated mRNA decay rules. Nucleic Acids Res. 53 , gkaf1306 (2025). 

21. Rhee, J. -K., Lee, S., Park, W. -Y., Kim, Y. -H. & Kim, T. -M. Allelic imbalance of somatic 

mutations in cancer genomes and transcriptomes. Sci. Rep. 7, 1653 (2017). 

22. Lindeboom, R. G. H., Vermeulen, M., Lehner, B. & Supek, F. The impact of nonsense -

mediated mRNA decay on genetic disease, gene editing and cancer immunotherapy. Nat. 

Genet. 51 , 1645 –1651 (2019). 

23. Blakes, A. J. M., Whiffin, N., Johnson, C. A., Ellingford, J. M. & Banka, S. Regional nonsense 

constraint offers biological and clinical insights into genetic disease. Nat. Commun. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -026 -69983 -z (2026) doi:10.1038/s41467 -026 -69983 -z. 

24. Kim, Y. et al. A spectrum of nonsense -mediated mRNA decay efficiency along the degree of 

mutational constraint. Commun. Biol. 7, 1461 (2024). 

25. Veiner, M. & Supek, F. The DNA dialect: a comprehensive guide to pretrained genomic 

language models. Mol. Syst. Biol. 22 , 309 –332 (2026). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26. Penić, R. J., Vlašić, T., Huber, R. G., Wan, Y. & Šikić, M. RiNALMo: general -purpose RNA 

language models can generalize well on structure prediction tasks. Nat. Commun. 16 , 5671 

(2025). 

27. Wang, N. et al. Multi -purpose RNA language modelling with motif -aware pretraining and 

type -guided fine -tuning. Nat. Mach. Intell. 6, 548 –557 (2024). 

28. Fradkin, P. et al. Orthrus: Towards Evolutionary and Functional RNA Foundation Models. 

Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.10.617658 (2024). 

29. Balasubramanian, S. et al. Using ALoFT to determine the impact of putative loss -of -function 

variants in protein -coding genes. Nat. Commun. 8, 382 (2017). 

30. Coban -Akdemir, Z. et al. Identifying Genes Whose Mutant Transcripts Cause Dominant 

Disease Traits by Potential Gain -of -Function Alleles. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 103 , 171 –187 

(2018). 

31. Hu, Z., Yau, C. & Ahmed, A. A. A pan -cancer genome -wide analysis reveals tumour 

dependencies by induction of nonsense -mediated decay. Nat. Commun. 8, 15943 (2017). 

32. Klonowski, J., Liang, Q., Coban -Akdemir, Z., Lo, C. & Kostka, D. aenmd: annotating escape 

from nonsense -mediated decay for transcripts with protein -truncating variants. 

Bioinformatics 39 , btad556 (2023). 

33. Miller, J. N. & Pearce, D. A. Nonsense -mediated decay in genetic disease: Friend or foe? 

Mutat. Res. Mutat. Res. 762 , 52 –64 (2014). 

34. Supek, F., Lehner, B. & Lindeboom, R. G. H. To NMD or Not To NMD: Nonsense -Mediated 

mRNA Decay in Cancer and Other Genetic Diseases. Trends Genet. 37 , 657 –668 (2021). 

35. Khajavi, M., Inoue, K. & Lupski, J. R. Nonsense -mediated mRNA decay modulates clinical 

outcome of genetic disease. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 14 , 1074 –1081 (2006). 

36. Lejeune, F. Nonsense -Mediated mRNA Decay, a Finely Regulated Mechanism. 

Biomedicines 10 , 141 (2022). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37. Toledano, I., Supek, F. & Lehner, B. Genome -scale quantification and prediction of 

pathogenic stop codon readthrough by small molecules. Nat. Genet. 56 , 1914 –1924 (2024). 

38. Nasif, S. et al. Inhibition of nonsense -mediated mRNA decay reduces the tumorigenicity of 

human fibrosarcoma cells. NAR Cancer 5, zcad048 (2023). 

39. Amar -Schwartz, A. et al. Inhibition of nonsense -mediated mRNA decay may improve stop 

codon read -through therapy for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Hum. Mol. Genet. 32 ,

2455 –2463 (2023). 

40. Martin, L. et al. Identification and Characterization of Small Molecules That Inhibit 

Nonsense -Mediated RNA Decay and Suppress Nonsense p53 Mutations. Cancer Res. 74 ,

3104 –3113 (2014). 

41. Ben ‑Shachar, S. et al. Dominant versus recessive traits conveyed by allelic mutations – to 

what extent is nonsense ‑mediated decay involved? Clin. Genet. 75 , 394 –400 (2009). 

42. Lonsdale, J. et al. The Genotype -Tissue Expression (GTEx) project. Nat. Genet. 45 , 580 –585 

(2013). 

43. Thermann, R. Binary specification of nonsense codons by splicing and cytoplasmic 

translation. EMBO J. 17 , 3484 –3494 (1998). 

44. Lindeboom, R. G. H. NMDetective. 227434810 Bytes figshare 

https://doi.org/10.6084/M9.FIGSHARE.7803398 (2019). 

45.  Wrenbeck, E. E.  et al.  Plasmid -based one -pot saturation mutagenesis. Nat. Methods 13 ,

928 –930 (2016). 

46. Faure, A. J., Schmiedel, J. M., Baeza -Centurion, P. & Lehner, B. DiMSum: an error model and 

pipeline for analyzing deep mutational scanning data and diagnosing common 

experimental pathologies. Genome Biol. 21 , 207 (2020). 

47. Jaganathan, K. et al. Predicting Splicing from Primary Sequence with Deep Learning. Cell 

176 , 535 -548.e24 (2019). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

48. Buisson, M., Anczuków, O., Zetoune, A. B., Ware, M. D. & Mazoyer, S. The 185delAG 

mutation (c.68_69delAG) in theBRCA1 gene triggers translation reinitiation at a downstream 

AUG codon. Hum. Mutat. 27 , 1024 –1029 (2006). 

49. Kolakada, D. et al. Systematic analysis of nonsense variants uncovers peptide release rate 

as a novel modifier of nonsense -mediated mRNA decay. Cell Genomics 5, 100882 (2025). 

50. Baker, S. L. & Hogg, J. R. A system for coordinated analysis of translational readthrough and 

nonsense -mediated mRNA decay. PLOS ONE 12 , e0173980 (2017). 

51. Loughran, G. et al. Evidence of efficient stop codon readthrough in four mammalian genes. 

Nucleic Acids Res. 42 , 8928 –8938 (2014). 

52. Cridge, A. G., Crowe -McAuliffe, C., Mathew, S. F. & Tate, W. P. Eukaryotic translational 

termination efficiency is influenced by the 3′ nucleotides within the ribosomal mRNA 

channel. Nucleic Acids Res. 46 , 1927 –1944 (2018). 

53. Pacho, F., Zambruno, G., Calabresi, V., Kiritsi, D. & Schneider, H. Efficiency of translation 

termination in humans is highly dependent upon nucleotides in the neighbourhood of a 

(premature) termination codon. J. Med. Genet. 48 , 640 –644 (2011). 

54. Nickless, A., Bailis, J. M. & You, Z. Control of gene expression through the nonsense -

mediated RNA decay pathway. Cell Biosci. 7, 26 (2017). 

55. Cortázar, M. A., Schmidt, J., Egab, I., Coban -Akdemir, Z. & Jagannathan, S. Genomic stop 

codon scanning reveals quantitative principles of nonsense -mediated mRNA decay. 

Preprint at https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.20.695734 (2025). 

56. Hsu, M. -K., Lin, H. -Y. & Chen, F. -C. NMD Classifier: A reliable and systematic classification 

tool for nonsense -mediated decay events. PLOS ONE 12 , e0174798 (2017). 

57. Saadat, A. & Fellay, J. From Mutation to Degradation: Predicting Nonsense -Mediated Decay 

with NMDEP.  Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2502.14547 (2025). 

58.  Dobin, A.  et al.  STAR: ultrafast universal RNA -seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29 , 15 –21 (2013). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.714003 doi: bioRxiv preprint

59. Van De Geijn, B., McVicker, G., Gilad, Y. & Pritchard, J. K. WASP: allele -specific software for 

robust molecular quantitative trait locus discovery. Nat. Methods 12 , 1061 –1063 (2015). 

60. Kim, S. et al. Strelka2: fast and accurate calling of germline and somatic variants. Nat. 

Methods 15 , 591 –594 (2018). 

61. Wang, K., Li, M. & Hakonarson, H. ANNOVAR: functional annotation of genetic variants from 

high -throughput sequencing data. Nucleic Acids Res. 38 , e164 –e164 (2010). 

62. Gudmundsson, S. et al. Variant interpretation using population databases: Lessons from 

gnomAD. Hum. Mutat. 43 , 1012 –1030 (2022). 

63. Ormond, C., Ryan, N. M., Corvin, A. & Heron, E. A. Converting single nucleotide variants 

between genome builds: from cautionary tale to solution. Brief. Bioinform. 22 , bbab069 

(2021). 

64. Agarwal, V. & Kelley, D. R. The genetic and biochemical determinants of mRNA degradation 

rates in mammals. Genome Biol. 23 , 245 (2022). 

65. Paszke, A. et al. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High -Performance Deep Learning Library. in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems vol. 32 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2019). 

66. Biewald, L. Experiment Tracking with Weights and Biases. (2020). 

67. Loshchilov, I. & Hutter, F. Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization.  Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1711.05101 (2019). 

68.  Sondka, Z.  et al.  The COSMIC Cancer Gene Census: describing genetic dysfunction across 

all human cancers. Nat. Rev. Cancer 18 , 696 –705 (2018). 

69. Dietlein, F. et al. Identification of cancer driver genes based on nucleotide context. Nat. 

Genet. 52 , 208 –218 (2020). 

70. Hart, T. et al. Evaluation and Design of Genome -Wide CRISPR/SpCas9 Knockout Screens. 

G3 GenesGenomesGenetics 7, 2719 –2727 (2017).