Title: Causal Stability Selection

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.09300v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 01:41:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 42

Markdown Content:
# CAUSAL STABILITY SELECTION 

FALCO J. BARGAGLI-STOFFI 1, Ōŗå AND OMAR MELIKECHI 2, Ōŗå

Abstract. Identifying covariates that modify treatment effects is a central problem in causal inference. Yet existing data-adaptive procedures do not provide finite-sample control over the expected number of false discoveries, risking spurious findings that fail to replicate. We introduce 

causal stability selection , an algorithm that combines cross-fitted estimation of conditional average treatment effects with integrated path stability selection. The method accommodates arbitrary treatment effect estimators and arbitrary base selectors, and produces a selection set with an explicit, non-asymptotic bound on the expected number of false positives. Under standard causal identifying assumptions and regularity conditions on the base selector, we prove that the estimated selection probabilities converge to their oracle counterparts at the rate of the underlying treatment effect estimator. This establishes a direct connection between treatment effect estimation and effect modifier discovery. We illustrate the method on a randomized trial in oncology and on observational data on maternal smoking and infant birthweight. 

1. Introduction 

A large proportion of randomized and observational studies report null average treatment effects. For example, 40% of trials registered on ClinicalTrials.gov find no significant overall effect (Dechartres et al., 2016). Yet null averages need not imply null effects: treatment response may vary systematically with pre-treatment covariates, even when the population mean is zero (Gates and Ealing, 2019). The same pattern appears in social policy and public health, where interventions with negligible average impacts often exhibit substantial variation in response (Weiss et al., 2014). Discovering which covariates drive this variationŌĆöthat is, identifying effect modifiers ŌĆöhas both practical and scientific value. Practically, effect modifier discovery is at the foundation of treatment targeting for precision interventions (Kosorok and Laber, 2019). Scientifically, identifying effect modifiers helps characterize populations and subgroups in which treatments are most and least effective (Athey and Imbens, 2016). Identifying effect modifiers can therefore reveal clinical or policy value in interventions otherwise deemed ineffective. Formally, effect modifiers are defined in terms of the conditional average treatment effect (CATE), 

Žä (x) = E [Y (1) ŌłÆ Y (0) | X = x] , (1.1) where X = ( X1, . . . , X p) Ōłł Rp are the pre-treatment covariates and Y (1) and Y (0) are potential outcomes under treatment and control, respectively (Rubin, 1974). When Žä is non-constant in x, the treatment effect is said to be heterogeneous . Many approaches have been developed to estimate Žä ;however, a method may estimate Žä accurately without revealing which covariates drive heterogeneity. In this work, our objective is effect modifier discovery, that is, to identify the covariates that explain variation in Žä (this task is formally defined in Section 2). 

> 1

Department of Biostatistics, University of California, Los Angeles. Email: falco@ucla.edu 

> 2

Department of Statistical Science, Duke University. Email: omar.melikechi@duke.edu 

> Ōŗå

Equal contribution. 

> 1
> arXiv:2605.09300v1 [stat.ME] 10 May 2026

While CATE estimation has received significant attention in recent years, several methods aimed specifically at effect modifier discovery have also been introduced. Many of these focus on con-structing variable importance measures to quantify each covariateŌĆÖs contribution to treatment effect heterogeneity. For example, Hines et al. (2025) develop model-free importance measures based on efficient influence functions, B┬┤ enard and Josse (2023) derive importance measures from causal forests, and Boileau et al. (2025) introduce a nonparametric framework for defining effect modifier importance and establish asymptotic properties of their proposed estimators. While these approaches provide valuable tools for quantifying the contribution of each covariate to heterogeneityŌĆöand some include inferential procedures that can inform selectionŌĆöthey are not primarily designed to identify a parsimonious set of genuine effect modifiers with error rate guarantees. In a separate line of work more closely aligned with our objective, Zhao et al. (2022) propose a two-stage procedure that first estimates nuisance functions related to the CATE, then applies the lasso (Tibshirani, 1996) to select a parsimonious model for effect modification. Despite these advances, existing methods do not provide finite-sample bounds on the expected number of selected covariates that are spurious effect modifiers. As we illustrate below, the absence of such control can lead to severely inflated false positive rates, undermining the reliability and replicability of downstream analyses and targeted interventions (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995; Yu, 2013). Achieving false discovery control while maintaining power to detect genuine effect modifiers is the central challenge we address. 

1.1. Illustrative example. To illustrate the challenge of effect modifier discovery, we present the results of a simulation study in which data are generated from the linear model 

Y = XŌŖż╬▓ + ZXŌŖż╬│ + ╬Ą, (1.2) where Z Ōłł { 0, 1} is a binary treatment and ╬Ą is random noise satisfying E[╬Ą | X, Z ] = 0. The coefficients ╬▓, ╬│ Ōłł Rp capture effects of X on Y that are unrelated and related to treatment, respectively, and their nonzero coordinates P = {j : ╬▓j╠Ė = 0 } and E = {j : ╬│j╠Ė = 0 } correspond to 

prognostic variables and effect modifiers . Under standard assumptions formalized in Section 2, 

Y (1) ŌłÆ Y (0) = XŌŖż╬│ + ╬Ą(1) ŌłÆ ╬Ą(0) ,

where Y (z) and ╬Ą(z) are the outcome and noise terms when Z = z. Hence the CATE (1.1) satisfies 

Žä (X) = E [Y (1) ŌłÆ Y (0) | X] = XŌŖż╬│.

Figure 1 shows the results of this simulation study averaged over 200 trials. In each trial, n = 1 , 000 samples are drawn independently according to Equation 1.2, where p = 100 and X Ōł╝ N (0 , ╬Ż) with 

╬Ż Ōłł R100 ├Ś100 given by ╬Ż ij = 0 .5|iŌłÆj|. Prior to each trial, ╬▓ and ╬│ are assigned 10 nonzero entries selected uniformly at random from {1, . . . , 100 }, with values drawn uniformly from [ ŌłÆ1, ŌłÆ0.5] Ōł¬[0 .5, 1]. The overall signal-to-noise ratio, SNR = Var( XŌŖż╬▓ + ZXŌŖż╬│)/Var( ╬Ą), is set to 1. If Žä were known, identifying effect modifiers would amount to standard supervised variable selection with predictors X and response Žä (X). The panels on the right side of Figure 1 show that the lasso and integrated path stability selection (Melikechi and Miller, 2026) perform especially well in this case, identifying all 10 effect modifiers on average while maintaining very low FDR, while the Knockoffs method (Barber and Cand` es, 2015) also performs well once the nominal FDR exceeds 0.1. This oracle setting is untenable in practice, however, because each unit receives only one of the two potential treatments, never both: the fundamental problem of causal inference (Holland, 1986). Consequently, Žä (X) must be estimated from data. 

> 2

Figure 1. Performance of variable selection methods for effect modifier discovery. 

Top row: True positive rate (TPR), defined as the proportion of identified effect modifiers among all true effect modifiers, averaged over 200 simulation trials. Bottom row: False discovery rate (FDR), defined as the proportion of false discoveries among all selected covariates, averaged over 200 trials. Black diagonal dashed lines in the bottom panels represent perfect FDR control; points on or below this line indicate successful control at the nominal level. Left panels: Results obtained under honest splitting. Middle panels: Results obtained under 2-fold cross-fitting. Right panels: 

Results obtained under ŌĆ£oracle settingŌĆØ in which Žä is known; FDR control fails for BH in this setting largely due to correlation between covariates. Acronyms : IPSS: integrated path stability selection; KO: knockoffs; BH: Benjamini-Hochberg; Lasso: Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator. Two general approaches for handling the unknown function Žä are honest splitting and K-fold cross-fitting , both of which have been used extensively for CATE estimation (Athey and Imbens, 2016; Chernozhukov et al., 2018; Kennedy, 2023) and, less commonly, for effect modifier discovery (Zhao et al., 2022; Bargagli-Stoffi et al., 2025, 2020). In the context of effect modifier discovery, honest splitting proceeds as follows: samples are partitioned into disjoint subsets A and Ac; samples in A are used to construct an estimate ╦åŽäA of Žä , and variable selection is performed using the pairs {(xi, ╦åŽäA(xi)) : i Ōłł Ac}. Because ╦åŽäA is constructed from samples in A while the selection step uses those in Ac, this approach reduces overfitting. However, honest splitting only uses half of the available observations for variable selection, which can reduce power. K-fold cross-fitting seeks to ameliorate this issue by partitioning samples into K folds {A1, . . . , A K }. For each k = 1 , . . . , K , an estimate ╦åŽä (k) is constructed using all samples not in Ak, and variable selection is performed on the aggregated pairs {(xi, ╦åŽä (k)(xi)) : i Ōłł Ak, k = 1 , . . . , K }.Despite their appeal, the honest splitting and cross-fitting results shown in Figure 1 indicate that neither lasso nor any of the variable selection methods with false discovery control are able to keep the false discovery rate (FDR) below nominal levels with either honest splitting or cross-fitting. Lasso, which does not provide explicit false discovery control (and hence does not vary with the 

> 3

target FDR), makes a high number of false discoveries in both cases: on average, over 80% of the covariates it selects are not effect modifiers. Moreover, results for this same simulation design (Figure S1) indicate that increasing the number of folds K does little to resolve this issue. 

1.2. Contributions. We present a formal framework for effect modifier discovery and a method, 

Causal Stability Selection (CausalStabSel ), for selecting effect modifiers that combines CATE estimation and cross-fitting approaches from modern causal inference (Fan et al., 2022; Kennedy, 2023) with stability selection (Meinshausen and B┬© uhlmann, 2010; Melikechi and Miller, 2026). Our contributions are threefold. First, we develop a unified framework for effect modifier discovery. To our knowledge, this is the first that provides a non-asymptotic, finite-sample upper bound on the expected number of false positives without restrictions on the form of the base selector or the CATE estimator. Second, we prove that the central quantities of CausalStabSel , called selection probabilities , are asymptotically unbiased for the corresponding oracle probabilities obtained if the true conditional treatment effect were observed. The convergence rate is governed directly by the rate of the underlying CATE estimator, establishing a connection between treatment effect estimation and effect modifier discovery. Third, by aggregating results across repeated subsamples, CausalStabSel 

yields stable discoveries while remaining computationally tractable in high dimensions. Our proposed framework requires standard causal assumptions (SUTVA and strong ignorability) and regularity conditions on the base selector, making it applicable to both randomized trials and observational studies. 

1.3. Paper structure. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 formally defines the problem of heterogeneous effects identification. Section 3 introduces the CausalStabSel 

method. Section 4 establishes theoretical guarantees. Section 5 presents simulation studies, and Section 6 applies the method to real data. Section 7 concludes. An open-source package implementing our method and the applied examples is provided. 2. Problem formulation 

In Section 2.1, we introduce notation and the potential outcomes framework of causal inference under which we operate. In Section 2.2, we formally define the central quantities of our investigationŌĆöeffect modifiersŌĆöand the task of effect modifier discovery. 

2.1. Notation and causal framework. Uppercase letters denote random variables and lowercase letters represent their realized values. Bold letters represent vectors and matrices. For any positive integer n, define [ n] = {1, . . . , n }. We assume that our observed data are realizations ( xi, y i, z i)of n independent random vectors ( Xi, Y i, Z i) each with the same distribution as ( X, Y, Z ), where 

X Ōłł Rp is a vector of covariates, Z Ōłł { 0, 1} is a binary treatment, and Y Ōłł R is the observed outcome. For generic random variables A, B, and C, we write A ŌŖźŌŖź B | C when A and B are conditionally independent given C, and A╠Ė ŌŖźŌŖź B | C otherwise. For X Ōłł Rp, define XŌłÆj =(X1, . . . , X jŌłÆ1, X j+1 , . . . , X p). Variables Xj are often referred to by their indices, e.g., ŌĆ£ j is an effect modifierŌĆØ is shorthand for ŌĆ£ Xj is an effect modifier.ŌĆØ Finally, 1(┬Ę) denotes the indicator function: 

1(A) = 1 if event A is true, and 1(A) = 0 otherwise. 

Assumption 1 (Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA)) . For all i Ōłł [n], the potential outcome Yi satisfies: 

> 4

(i) No interference : Yi(z) = Yi(zi) for any z = ( z1, . . . , z n);(ii) Consistency : If Zi = z, then Yi = Yi(z) almost surely. 

Part (i) states that each unitŌĆÖs outcome does not depend on treatments assigned to the other units, and hence that the potential outcomes Yi(0) and Yi(1) are well-defined. Part (ii) ensures each treatment level has a single version, so the observed outcome satisfies yi = Yi(zi). The fundamental problem of causal inference is that only one of Yi(0) or Yi(1) is observed for each i (Holland, 1986). 

Assumption 2 (Strong Ignorability) . The treatment assignment satisfies: (i) Unconfoundedness : (Y (0) , Y (1)) ŌŖźŌŖź Z | X;(ii) Overlap/Positivity : 0 < P (Z = 1 | X = x) < 1 for all x in the support of X.

Strong ignorability ensures that, conditional on covariates, treatment assignment is independent of the potential outcomes (unconfoundedness) and that each unit has a positive probability of receiving either treatment (overlap) (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983). Under Assumption 1, the observed outcome satisfies 

Y = Y (0) + Z(Y (1) ŌłÆ Y (0)) = ╬╝(X) + ZŽä (X) + ╬Ą, (2.1) where ╬╝(X) = E[Y (0) | X] is the prognostic function, Žä (X) = E[Y (1) ŌłÆ Y (0) | X] is the CATE, and ╬Ą = Y (0) ŌłÆ ╬╝(X) + Z(Y (1) ŌłÆ Y (0) ŌłÆ Žä (X)) satisfies E[╬Ą | X, Z ] = 0. Under Assumption 2, the prognostic and CATE functions satisfy 

╬╝(X) = E[Y (0) | X] = E[Y | Z = 0 , X],Žä (X) = E[Y (1) ŌłÆ Y (0) | X] = E[Y | Z = 1 , X] ŌłÆ E[Y | Z = 0 , X].

2.2. Treatment effect modifiers. The CATE captures how treatment effects vary with X, while 

╬╝(X) captures associations between X and Y unrelated to treatment. Formally, we define prognostic variables and effect modifiers as follows. 

Definition 1 (Prognostic Variables and Effect Modifiers ). A covariate Xj is: (i) A prognostic variable if ╬╝(X)╠Ė ŌŖźŌŖź Xj | XŌłÆj , i.e., Xj provides information about the baseline outcome not captured by other covariates; (ii) A treatment effect modifier , or, more simply, an effect modifier , if Žä (X)╠Ė ŌŖźŌŖź Xj | XŌłÆj , i.e., 

Xj provides information about treatment effect heterogeneity not captured by other covariates. We denote the sets of prognostic variables and effect modifiers by P := {j : ╬╝(X)╠Ė ŌŖźŌŖź Xj | XŌłÆj } and 

E := {j : Žä (X)╠Ė ŌŖźŌŖź Xj | XŌłÆj }, respectively. 

Remark 1 (Interpretation of Definition 1) . Since Žä (X) and ╬╝(X) are deterministic functions of 

X, the conditional independence statements in Definition 1 have a direct functional interpretation. The statement Žä (X)╠Ė ŌŖźŌŖź Xj | XŌłÆj is equivalent to Žä not being almost-surely a function of XŌłÆj alone; that is, there exist values xŌłÆj at which Žä varies with xj . An analogous interpretation applies to ╬╝

and prognostic variables. 

> 5

The conditional independence formulation in Definition 1 extends prior characterizations developed for specific settings (for example, coefficient sparsity in linear models (Tian et al., 2014)) to a general, model-agnostic form applicable to arbitrary ╬╝ and Žä . In the linear setting, Equation 1.2, where ╬╝(X) = XŌŖż╬▓ and Žä (X) = XŌŖż╬│, these reduce to P = {j : ╬▓j╠Ė = 0 } and E = {j : ╬│j╠Ė = 0 }.Furthermore, we note that P and E are not mutually exclusive; that is, a covariate may be both prognostic and an effect modifier. The following lemma shows that our definition of effect modifier in Definition 1 is equivalent to variance-based variable importance measures of heterogeneity (Hines et al., 2025; Williamson et al., 2023; Shin et al., 2025). However, the latter require that Žä (X) has a finite second moment, making our characterization in terms of conditional independence slightly more general. 

Lemma 2.1 (Equivalent Characterizations of Effect Modifiers) . Assume E(Žä (X)2) < Ōł× and define 

Žäj (X) = E[Y (1) ŌłÆY (0) | XŌłÆj ]. Then Xj is an effect modifier if and only if Var (Žäj (X)) ╠Ė = Var (Žä (X)) .Proof. If Xj is not an effect modifier, that is, if Žä (X) ŌŖźŌŖź Xj | XŌłÆj , then 

Žä (X) = E[Žä (X) | XŌłÆj ] = E[Y (1) ŌłÆ Y (0) | XŌłÆj ] = Žäj (X)almost surely, where the second equality holds by the tower property of conditional expectation. Hence Var( Žä (X)) = Var( Žäj (X)). Conversely, if Var( Žä (X)) = Var( Žäj (X)), then Var( Žäj (X)) = Var( Žä (X)) = Var( E[Žä (X) | XŌłÆj ]) + E(Var[ Žä (X) | XŌłÆj ]) = Var( Žäj (X)) + E(Var[ Žä (X) | XŌłÆj ]) .

Hence E(Var [Žä (X) | XŌłÆj ]) = 0, implying that Var [Žä (X) | XŌłÆj ] = 0 almost surely. Thus, Žä (X) is measurable with respect to the Žā-algebra generated by XŌłÆj , so Žä (X) ŌŖźŌŖź Xj | XŌłÆj . Ō¢Ī

With our definition of effect modifier in hand, we now state the principal goal of this work. 

Problem Statement (Effect Modifier Discovery ). Given n samples (xi, y i, z i) Ōłł Rp ├ŚR├Ś{ 0, 1},construct an estimator ╦åE of E that controls the expected number of false positives, E(FP ) = E| ╦åE Ōł® E c|.

Figure 1 showed that many existing methods fail at this task. In the next section, we introduce 

CausalStabSel , a method designed for effect modifier discovery with false discovery control. 3. Causal Stability Selection 

Rather than apply a generic variable selection algorithm once to the full dataset, CausalStabSel ŌĆöand stability selection more broadlyŌĆöaggregates selections across multiple random subsamples of the data, yielding more stable results and finite-sample false discovery control (Meinshausen and B┬© uhlmann, 2010). However, existing versions of stability selection assume the outcome of interest is directly observed, making them ill-equipped for effect modifier discovery. To overcome this limitation, 

CausalStabSel incorporates CATE estimation into the subsampling scheme, repeatedly using one subset of samples to estimate the CATE and the remaining samples for selection. The rest of this section is dedicated to describing the CausalStabSel algorithm. In Section 3.1, we introduce the central quantities underlying CausalStabSel , selection probabilities , which quantify 

> 6

the probability that a covariate is an effect modifier. In Section 3.2, we explain how selection probabilities are used to construct the final CausalStabSel estimate of the true set of effect modifiers, E, and in Section 3.3, we discuss the inputs to CausalStabSel .

Algorithm 1 Cross-fitted Estimation of Selection Probabilities 

Input: Data {(xi, y i, z i)}ni=1 , base selector ╦åS╬╗, CATE estimator ╦åŽä , parameter grid ╬ø, number of iterations B, number of subsamples m Ōēż ŌīŖ n/ 2Ōīŗ. 

> 1:

for b = 1 , . . . , B do  

> 2:

Randomly select disjoint subsets A2bŌłÆ1, A 2b ŌŖå [n] of size m. 

> 3:

Train ╦å Žä on samples {(xi, y i, z i) : i Ōłł Ac

> 2bŌłÆ1

}. Denote the model by ╦å ŽäAc 

> 2bŌłÆ1

. 

> 4:

Predict ╦å ŽäAc 

> 2bŌłÆ1

(xi) for all i Ōłł A2bŌłÆ1. 

> 5:

for ╬╗ Ōłł ╬ø do  

> 6:

Evaluate ╦åS╬╗({(xi, ╦åŽäAc 

> 2bŌłÆ1

(xi)) : i Ōłł A2bŌłÆ1}).  

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

Repeat steps 3ŌĆō7 with A2b in place of A2bŌłÆ1. 

> 9:

end for Output: Estimated selection probabilities ╦åŽĆj,m (╬╗) = 12B

P2Bb=1 1



j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗({(xi, ╦åŽäAcb (xi)) : i Ōłł Ab})



.

3.1. Selection probabilities. Let ╦åS╬╗ be any supervised variable selection algorithm parametrized by ╬╗ Ōłł R; that is, given observed covariateŌĆōresponse pairs {(xi, Žä i) : i Ōłł A} for some index set A,╦åS╬╗({(xi, Žä i) : i Ōłł A}) ŌŖå [p] is an estimate of the covariates that directly relate to the response. In our setting, the responses Žäi = Žä (xi) are the unobserved CATE values, and the relevant covariates are the effect modifiers, E. Specific examples of ╦åS╬╗ are provided in Section 3.3. For a subset A ŌŖå [n] of size m, the selection probability ŽĆj,m (╬╗) of variable j is 

ŽĆj,m (╬╗) = P



j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗(XA, Žä (XA)) 



. (3.1) We regard these selection probabilities as oracle quantities because they correspond to the idealized setting in which Žä is known. Note that under the independent samples assumption, ŽĆj,m depends on 

A only through the subsample size m.

CausalStabSel consists of two key steps: (i) estimating the selection probabilities ŽĆj,m (╬╗) from observed data, and (ii) using the estimated selection probabilities to construct an estimator of E.Algorithm 1 describes step (i): in each of B subsampling steps, a random subset A2bŌłÆ1 ŌŖå [n] of size m is selected, and a user-specified CATE estimation algorithm ╦å Žä is trained using the held-out samples Ac 

> 2bŌłÆ1

= [ n] \ A2bŌłÆ1. The resulting model, ╦å ŽäAc 

> 2bŌłÆ1

, is then used to predict CATE values for samples in A2bŌłÆ1 and ╦åS╬╗ is applied to the pairs {(xi, ╦åŽäAc 

> 2bŌłÆ1

(xi)) : i Ōłł A2bŌłÆ1}. The final estimated selection probability, ╦åŽĆj,m (╬╗) for feature j at ╬╗, is the proportion of times j is selected across all 2 B

subsamples. This complementary pairs design, which consists of drawing two disjoint subsets per iteration rather than one, has been shown to moderately improve selection performance relative to the original stability selection algorithm (Shah and Samworth, 2013). Using disjoint samples for CATE estimation and selection in Algorithm 1 is critical: when the same samples are used for both, the prediction ╦åŽä (xi) depends on xi through the training process, inducing an artifactual dependence between xi and ╦åŽä (xi) that the base selector mistakes for genuine effect modification. Cross-fitting breaks this dependence by ensuring ╦åŽäAc is independent of xi for 

i Ōłł A. Furthermore, as shown by the violations of FDR control in Figure 1, splitting the data only 

> 7

once prior to applying stability selection or other variable selection methods does little to mitigate this problem. Only by repeated cross-fittingŌĆöthat is, training ╦åŽä on samples in Ac and selecting on samples in A across multiple iterationsŌĆöis this source of bias controlled. We formalize this in Section 4. 

3.2. Constructing the selection set. After estimating the selection probabilities via Algorithm 1, the second and final step of CausalStabSel is to construct an estimate of E so as to control the expected number of false positives, E(FP ). In the original stability selection paper, Meinshausen and B┬© uhlmann (2010) achieve this by considering the estimate ╦åESS =



j : max  

> ╬╗Ōłł╬ø

╦åŽĆj,m (╬╗) Ōēź ╬│



, (3.2) where ╬ø ŌŖå R is a set of ╬╗ values and ╬│ is a user-specified threshold. However, this selection criterion is known to produce overly-conservative estimates, due in part to its relatively loose theoretical upper bound on E( FP ) (Alexander and Lange, 2011; Melikechi and Miller, 2026). In Melikechi and Miller (2026), a significantly tighter upper bound on E(FP) is obtained via the selection criterion ╦åE╬│ =



j :

Z

> ╬ø

f (╦å ŽĆj,m (╬╗)) ╬╝(d╬╗ ) Ōēź ╬│



, (3.3) where f (x) = (2 xŌłÆ1) 3 1(x Ōēź 1/2) and ╬╝ is an arbitrary probability measure on ╬ø whose specification is discussed in Section 3.3. This approach, called integrated path stability selection (IPSS), achieves this tighter upper bound on E(FP ) by transforming (via f ) and integrating (rather than maximizing) the selection probabilities over ╬ø, leading to more true positives than other versions of stability selection while maintaining false positive control. For this reason, we use the IPSS criterion (3.3) when implementing CausalStabSel . In Section 4.2, we prove that an upper bound on E( FP ) similar to the original IPSS bound holds for CausalStabSel .Another benefit of IPSS is that the threshold ╬│ does not need to be specified by the user. Instead, the theoretical upper bound on E( FP ) is used to assign an expected false positive (efp) score, efp (j), to each variable j (Melikechi et al., 2025). Given a user-specified target E(FP ) level t, the final selection set ╦åE = {j : efp (j) Ōēż t} has at most t false positives on average. For FDR control, we select the largest set satisfying t/ | ╦åE| Ōēż ╬▒ for a nominal FDR level ╬▒.

3.3. Implementation. CausalStabSel involves several inputs: the variable selection algorithm, or 

base selector , ╦åS╬╗, the CATE estimator ╦åŽä , the subsample size m, the parameter set ╬ø and probability measure ╬╝ on ╬ø, and the number of iterations B. The CATE estimator is unique to CausalStabSel 

relative to other stability selection methods, and m plays a different role here than in standard stability selection: smaller subsamples leave more data for CATE estimation, and we show in Section 4 that this trade-off is asymptotically favorable. Both are further discussed below and analyzed in detail in Section 4. The remaining inputs serve identical purposes in CausalStabSel and in IPSS. We briefly describe these below, referring the reader to Melikechi and Miller (2026) and Melikechi et al. (2025) for details. 

CausalStabSel is compatible with any base selector ╦åS╬╗. Two broad classes are (i) penalized regression and (ii) thresholding variable importance scores. The former consists of regularized parametric models such as the lasso (Tibshirani, 1996) and adaptive lasso (Zou, 2006), in which case ╬╗ Ōēź 0 is the regularization strength. The latter consists of selectors ╦åS╬╗ = {j : ╬” j > ╬╗ },where ╬” j measures the importance of variable j computed via any algorithmŌĆösuch as tree-based or deep learning modelsŌĆöand ╬╗ is the importance threshold. In this work, we use lasso-based 

> 8

selection and mean decrease impurity (MDI) from XGBoost (Chen and Guestrin, 2016) as our base estimators. When combined with IPSS, MDI from XGBoost exhibits strong selection performance and computational efficiency relative to other importance scores across a wide range of settings, most notably when there are nonlinear relationships in the data (Melikechi et al., 2025). We note that the Lipschitz condition on importance scores introduced in Section 4 (Assumption 3) is most readily verified for linear scores such as lasso coefficients; for tree-based importance measures including MDI, the condition is taken as a high-level regularity assumption. Similar to the base selector, CausalStabSel is compatible with any CATE estimation method. In this work, we consider three meta-learning approaches: T- and X-learners (K┬© unzel et al., 2019), and the DR-learner (Kennedy, 2023). Each combines one or more supervised regression modelsŌĆöits base learners ŌĆöto form a CATE estimate. On the theoretical side, the performance of CausalStabSel is governed by the CATE estimation error EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź; when this error vanishes at the parametric rate nŌłÆ1/2, the CausalStabSel selection probabilities are asymptotically unbiased (Corollary 1), the CausalStabSel selection set converges to its oracle counterpart (Corollary 2), and the false discovery bound matches that of the oracle setting (Theorem 4). The DR-learner attains this rate under standard regularity conditions, while analogous guarantees have not been established for T-and X-learners. On the empirical side, we compare all three meta-learners, each implemented with both ridge regression and gradient boosting as base learners (with lasso as the CausalStabSel base selector in the linear setting and XGBoost importance scores in the nonlinear setting). Figure S2 reports the results. The three ridge-based implementations produce nearly identical CausalStabSel 

performance: strong in the linear setting, where the model is correctly specified, and poor in the nonlinear setting. The XGBoost-based implementations differ modestly, with the DR-learner achieving better FDR control than the T- and X-learners. All three perform well in the nonlinear setting and moderately worse than the ridge-based estimators in the linear setting, and their computational requirements are similar in practice. Combined with its theoretical properties, this leads us to recommend the DR-learner as the default CATE estimator in CausalStabSel .For IPSS and other forms of stability selection, the subsample size m is typically fixed at ŌīŖn/ 2Ōīŗ.For CausalStabSel , however, there is benefit to choosing smaller values when n is large, since the 

n ŌłÆ m held-out samples are used for CATE estimation which, in our experience, tends to benefit more than selection from additional samples. In Section 4, we formalize this claim, proving that 

CausalStabSel achieves oracle performance asymptotically as n, B ŌåÆ Ōł× provided that m = o(ŌłÜn). For smaller sample sizes where the cost of reducing m below ŌīŖn/ 2Ōīŗ outweighs the benefit, we recommend m = ŌīŖn/ 2Ōīŗ.The roles of the remaining inputs, ╬ø, ╬╝, and B, are identical to their roles in IPSS. Briefly, ╬ø = [ ╬╗min , ╬╗ max ] is discretized to a finite grid with ╬╗max chosen large enough that no variables are selected, and the integral in (3.3) is approximated by a Riemann sum. For ╬╝, we use the family of probability measures ╬╝╬┤(d╬╗ ) ŌłØ ╬╗ŌłÆ╬┤ d╬╗ ; results are robust to the choice of ╬┤ (Melikechi and Miller, 2026; Melikechi et al., 2025). Similarly, results vary little with B provided B Ōēź 50 (Shah and Samworth, 2013; Melikechi and Miller, 2026). Our default is B = 100. 4. Theoretical Results 

The central challenge of effect modifier discovery is that Žä must be estimated, introducing additional uncertainty that can bias selections and inflate false discoveries. In this section, we characterize the performance of CausalStabSel in terms of CATE estimation error, establishing a direct connection 

> 9

between causal variable selection and prediction. We formalize this correspondence in three steps. First, we prove that the selection probabilities estimated via Algorithm 1 are asymptotically unbiased for their oracle counterparts (Theorem 1). Second, we prove that the CausalStabSel 

estimator ╦åE╬│ converges to the oracle selection set under CATE consistency and suitable subsampling conditions (Theorem 2). Third, we establish finite-sample false discovery control for CausalStabSel 

(Theorem 3). Proofs are deferred to Section S1. 

4.1. Oracle selection. Theorems 1 and 2 assume that ╦åS╬╗ selects variables by thresholding impor-tance scores (Section 3.3). Specifically, we consider selectors of the form ╦åS╬╗(XA, f ) = j : ╬” j (XA, f ) Ōēź ╬╗ , (4.1) where ╬” j : R|A|├Ś p ├Ś F ŌåÆ R quantifies the importance of Xj using samples in A, and F is a normed space of functions from Rp to R. In the traditional supervised setting, for example, ╬”j (XA, f ) = ╬” j (XA, f (XA)) is trained on data {(xi, y i) : i Ōłł A}, where the outcomes yi = f (xi) + ╬Ą

are directly observed and ╬Ą is additive noise. In our setting, f = Žä . Common examples of importance scores include magnitudes of estimated regression coefficients obtained from fitting generalized linear models, the aforementioned mean decrease impurity (MDI) scores computed from tree-ensemble methods such as random forests or gradient boosting, and even more general scores such as permutation importance and SHAP values (Breiman, 2001; Tibshirani, 1996). In the following, we fix Žä and the subsample size m, and let A ŌŖå [n] be of size m. Assumptions 3 and 4 are used in Theorems 1, 2, and 4; they are not required for Theorem 3. 

Assumption 3 (Lipschitz importance) . There exists L > 0 such that, for all ╬Ę Ōłł F ,

╬”j (XA, ╬Ę ) ŌłÆ ╬”j (XA, Žä ) Ōēż LŌłź╬Ę ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź almost surely . (4.2) 

Assumption 4 (Bounded density) . The conditional random variable ╬”j (XA, Žä ) | ╦åŽäAc admits a density that is bounded above by M < Ōł×.

Assumption 3 ensures that the score used by the base selector changes continuously when the CATE is perturbed. Assumption 4 rules out degenerate behavior at the importance score threshold, ╬╗.

Theorem 1 (Asymptotic unbiasedness) . Under Assumptions 3 and 4, 

E (╦å ŽĆj,m (╬╗)) ŌłÆ ŽĆj,m (╬╗) Ōēż 2M L EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź. (4.3) Theorem 1 shows that the bias in the estimated selection probabilities is controlled by the CATE estimation error, EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź. The key point is that in Algorithm 1, the estimator ╦åŽäAc is trained on observations outside A, whereas ╬” j (XA, Žä ) depends only on observations in A. Conditional on the random split, these two quantities are independent. Therefore, disagreement between the estimated and oracle selectors can occur only when the oracle score ╬” j (XA, Žä ) lies within LŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź of the importance threshold ╬╗. Assumption 4 controls the probability of this near-threshold event. 

Corollary 1 (Rate under CATE consistency) . Under the conditions of Theorem 1, if EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź =

o(1) as n ŌåÆ Ōł× , then ╦åŽĆj,m (╬╗) is asymptotically unbiased for ŽĆj,m (╬╗). If, in addition, EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź2 =

O(nŌłÆ1), then JensenŌĆÖs inequality gives EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź = O(nŌłÆ1/2), and the bias is O(nŌłÆ1/2).

> 10

We next show that the CausalStabSel estimator ╦åE╬│ converges to its oracle counterpart, 

EŌłŚ 

> ╬│

=



j :

Z

> ╬ø

f  ŽĆj,m (╬╗) ╬╝(d╬╗ ) Ōēź ╬│



. (4.4) The proof uses Theorem 1 together with a variance bound on the oracle version of ╦åŽĆj,m , in which Žä

replaces ╦å ŽäAc ; see Lemma S1.1 in Section S1. 

Theorem 2 (Oracle selection) . Suppose f in (3.3) is Lf -Lipschitz on [0 , 1] and define 

╬Ąj =

Z

> ╬ø

f  ŽĆj,m (╬╗) ╬╝(d╬╗ ) ŌłÆ ╬│ > 0 for all j. (4.5) 

Set ╬Ą = min j ╬Ąj . Under Assumptions 3 and 4, 

E ╦åE╬│ Ōłå EŌłŚ 

> ╬│

Ōēż Lf p╬Ą 2M L EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź +

r 14B + 2m2

n + 4 M L EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź

!

. (4.6) The margin condition (4.5) excludes the degenerate case in which variables lie exactly on the selection boundary. Since the integrated oracle scores Ōł½ f (ŽĆj,m (╬╗)) ╬╝(d╬╗ ) are p deterministic numbers, this condition holds for at most p values of ╬│ (and hence Lebesgue almost-everywhere on ╬ø). The bound (4.6) separates the three sources of error: Monte Carlo error from finite B, dependence from overlapping subsamples (the 2 m2/n term), and CATE estimation error. 

Corollary 2 (Oracle convergence) . Under the conditions of Theorem 2, if B ŌåÆ Ōł× , m = o(ŌłÜn),and EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź ŌåÆ 0, then E| ╦åE╬│ Ōłå EŌłŚ 

> ╬│

| ŌåÆ 0

4.2. False discovery control. We now establish a finite-sample upper bound on the expected number of false positives, E(FP) = E| ╦åE╬│ Ōł® E c|, selected by CausalStabSel . Let ╦åq(╬╗) = E ╦åS╬╗(XA, ╦åŽäAc ) (4.7) denote the expected number of variables selected by ╦åS╬╗ on samples {(Xi, ╦åŽäAc (Xi)) : i Ōłł A}, where ╦åŽäAc is trained on samples in Ac. Similarly, let q(╬╗) = E| ╦åS╬╗(XA, Žä )| be the expected number of variables selected by ╦åS╬╗ on samples in A, but with the true CATE in place of ╦å ŽäAc .

Assumption 5. For r Ōłł N, let A1, . . . , A 2r be subsets of [n] of size m, drawn as in Algorithm 1. We say that Assumption 5a holds for r if 

max 

> jŌłłE c

Z

> ╬ø

P j Ōłł

> 2r

\

> b=1

╦åS╬╗(XAb , ╦åŽäAcb )

!

╬╝(d╬╗ ) Ōēż

Z

> ╬ø

 ╦åq(╬╗)

p

2r

╬╝(d╬╗ ). (4.8) 

Similarly, we say that Assumption 5b holds for r if 

max 

> jŌłłE c

Z

> ╬ø

P j Ōłł

> 2r

\

> b=1

╦åS╬╗(XAb , Žä )

!

╬╝(d╬╗ ) Ōēż

Z

> ╬ø

 q(╬╗)

p

2r

╬╝(d╬╗ ). (4.9) Assumptions 5a and 5b say that, on average over all ╬╗ Ōłł ╬ø, the probability that ╦åS╬╗ selects the same null variable across multiple random subsamples of the data is no larger than the corresponding average probability under uniformly random selection with expected size ╦åq(╬╗) or q(╬╗), respectively. 

> 11

The only difference between the two is that Assumption 5a is stated in terms of the estimated CATEs, ╦å ŽäAcb , while Assumption 5b uses the true CATE, Žä .

Remark 2 (Relaxation of the IPSS condition) . Assumption 5 is stated in terms of integrals over 

╬ø, whereas the analogous condition in Melikechi and Miller (2026) (called Condition 1 in that paper) is required to hold pointwise in ╬╗. Since the pointwise inequality implies the integrated one, Assumption 5 is strictly weaker. This same relaxation applies to the original IPSS false discovery bound and requires no changes to its proof. 

Theorem 3 (False discovery control) . Suppose Assumption 5a holds for r Ōłł { 1, 2, 3}. Then 

E ╦åE╬│ Ōł® E c Ōēż 1

╬│

Z

> ╬ø

╦åq(╬╗)2

B2p + 3( B ŌłÆ 1)╦å q(╬╗)4

B2p3 + (B ŌłÆ 1)( B ŌłÆ 2)╦å q(╬╗)6

B2p5 ╬╝(d╬╗ ). (4.10) The proof follows the structure of the IPSS E(FP ) bound with two modifications: ╦åq(╬╗) is defined for the cross-fitted causal selector ╦åS╬╗(XA, ╦åŽäAc ), and the multinomial expansion at the heart of the argument requires only the integrated form of Assumption 5 (Remark 2). Theorem 3 also holds for arbitrary base selectors ╦åS╬╗, since its proof does not invoke Assumptions 3 and 4. The next result, Theorem 4, provides a complementary bound under the oracle exchangeability condition, Assumption 5b. The bound matches the IPSS false-positive bound with q(╬╗) in place of ╦åq(╬╗), plus an additional term Žü from Theorem 2 that vanishes asymptotically. 

Theorem 4 (Oracle false discovery control) . If the assumptions of Theorem 2 hold, and if Assump-tion 5b holds for r Ōłł { 1, 2, 3}, then 

E ╦åE╬│ Ōł® E c Ōēż Žü + 1

╬│

Z

> ╬ø

q(╬╗)2

B2p + 3( B ŌłÆ 1) q(╬╗)4

B2p3 + (B ŌłÆ 1)( B ŌłÆ 2) q(╬╗)6

B2p5 ╬╝(d╬╗ ), (4.11) 

where Žü denotes the right-hand side of (4.6) .

The quantity Žü in (4.11) controls the discrepancy between the cross-fitted and oracle selection sets. By Corollary 2, if B ŌåÆ Ōł× , m = o(ŌłÜn), and EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź ŌåÆ 0, then Žü ŌåÆ 0 and the bound reduces to the IPSS false-positive bound; that is, the expected number of false positives in the CausalStabSel 

estimator ╦åE╬│ converges to the expected number of false positives in the oracle selection set EŌłŚ 

> ╬│

.

Remark 3 (FDR control via efp scores) . Theorem 3 bounds E( FP ) = E| ╦åE╬│ Ōł® E c| directly. In practice, we convert this bound into an efp (expected false positive) score efp (j) for each variable j, defined as the smallest value of E(FP ) at which j would be selected (Melikechi et al., 2025). Given a target E(FP )

level t, the selection set {j : efp (j) Ōēż t} contains at most t false positives on average. For FDR control at level ╬▒, we choose the largest t for which the resulting selection set ╦åE(t) = {j : efp (j) Ōēż t}

satisfies t/ | ╦åE(t)| Ōēż ╬▒, which follows from the approximation FDR Ōēł E(FP) /E| ╦åE(t)| (Storey, 2003). 

5. Simulation Studies 

We conduct a series of simulation studies to evaluate the performance of CausalStabSel relative to other effect modifier discovery methods across a range of settings. There are 34 experiments total, 17 in which the prognostic function and CATE are linear functions of the covariates, and 17 in which they are nonlinear (Table 1). Each experiment consists of 200 trials. In Section 5.1, we describe the simulation designs. In Section 5.2, we describe the evaluation protocol and method implementations. In Section 5.3, we present the results. Additional results are reported in Section S2. 

> 12

5.1. Data generation. We generate data from the potential outcomes model (2.1) with an additional parameter, a, that controls the relative contributions of the prognostic variables and effect modifiers to the outcome; see (5.1) below. Covariates X Ōłł Rp are drawn from a multivariate normal distribution with mean zero and Toeplitz covariance ╬Ż Ōłł Rp├Śp, ╬Ż ij = Žü|iŌłÆj|, then standardized to unit empirical variance. The sets P and E are subsets of [ p] of fixed sizes |P| and |E| , drawn uniformly without replacement and independently of each other; PŌł®E may therefore be nonempty. Treatment assignment is modeled after a randomized control trial, Zi Ōł╝ Bernoulli (1 /2), in 30 of the 34 experiments. In the other four, there are 5 or 10 confounders drawn uniformly at random from [ p], which affect treatment assignment via a logistic propensity score, Pr (Zi = 1 | Xi) =  1 + exp (ŌłÆ P 

> jŌłłC

Xij )ŌłÆ1,where C ŌŖå [p] indexes the confounders. Confounders may overlap with P and E.In the linear case, the prognostic function and CATE are given by 

╬╝(X) = XŌŖż╬▓ and Žä (X) = XŌŖż╬│,

where the nonzero coordinates of ╬▓ and ╬│ are indexed by P and E, respectively, and drawn independently and uniformly from [ ŌłÆ1, ŌłÆ0.5] Ōł¬ [0 .5, 1]. In the nonlinear setting, 

╬╝(X) = X

> jŌłłP

exp  ŌłÆ 18 X2

> j

 and Žä (X) = X

> jŌłłE

exp  ŌłÆ 18 X2

> j

 .

In both settings, ╬╝ and Žä are centered and standardized to unit empirical variance within each simulated dataset. The observed outcome is 

Y = a╬╝ (X) + ZŽä (X) + ╬Ą, (5.1) where ╬Ą Ōł╝ N (0 , Žā 2) and Žā2 is calibrated to achieve a prespecified signal-to-noise ratio, SNR = Var  a╬╝ (X) + ZŽä (X) / Žā 2,

with the variance computed empirically on each simulated dataset. The parameter a Ōēź 0 controls the relative magnitude of the prognostic and treatment components: in the RCT case, Var (a╬╝ (X)) = a2

and Var (ZŽä (X)) = 1 /2, so a = 1 /ŌłÜ2 yields equal contributions, while the default a = 1 makes the prognostic component twice as variable as the treatment component. Parameter values for each experiment are summarized in Table 1. 

5.2. Methods. We compare CausalStabSel to six methods: IPSS (Melikechi and Miller, 2026), knockoffs (Barber and Cand` es, 2015), the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995), Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996), and variable importance scores from XGBoost (Chen and Guestrin, 2016) and causal forests (Wager and Athey, 2018). Table 2 summarizes the key implementation details, which we elaborate upon below. All methods except CausalStabSel and causal forest operate on cross-fitted pseudo-outcomes ╦åŽäi

that serve as individual-level estimates of Žä (xi). These are generated via K-fold cross-fitting as described in Section 1: for each fold k, an X-Learner is fit on the K ŌłÆ 1 training folds and applied to the held-out fold to obtain ╦åŽäi for each i Ōłł Ak. We use ridge regression for the X-LearnerŌĆÖs base models in the linear setting and gradient boosting in the nonlinear setting. We use K = 5 folds for all methods except XGB-VI, for which K = 10 showed improved performance compared to K = 5; the other methods showed no improvement at K = 10. 

CausalStabSel , IPSS, KO, and BH each target a nominal FDR level ╬▒ Ōłł [0 , 0.5]. The remaining three methods yield a fixed selection that does not vary with a nominal level: Lasso selects all covariates with nonzero coefficients at the cross-validation-selected penalty ╬╗, while XGB-VI and 

> 13

Parameter Linear Nonlinear 

n 500 1000 2000 500 1000 2000 

p 50 100 200 25 50 100 

|E| 5 10 15 2 5 10 

|P| 5 10 15 2 5 10 

|C| 0 5 10 0 5 10 

Žü 0 0.5 0.75 0 0.5 0.75 SNR 0.5 1 2 0.5 1 2

a 1ŌłÜ2 1 1.5 1ŌłÜ2 1 1.5

Table 1. Simulation settings . The baseline linear and nonlinear experiments cor-respond to all parameters set to their default values, shown in bold. The 32 single-parameter perturbations (16 per setting) each vary one parameter from its default to one of the non-bold values, holding the others fixed. Symbols: n (sample size); p

(number of covariates); |E| (number of effect modifiers); |P| (number of prognostic variables); |C| (number of confounders); Žü (correlation strength); SNR (signal-to-noise ratio); a (relative prognostic strength). Method FDR control Folds Base method Software 

CausalStabSel Ō£ō ŌĆö Lasso/XGBoost ŌĆöIPSS Ō£ō 5 Lasso/XGBoost ipss 

KO Ō£ō 5 Lasso/GLM knockoff (R) BH Ō£ō 5 OLS p-values statsmodels 

Lasso ├Ś 5 cross-validated Ōäō1 scikit-learn 

XGB-VI ├Ś 10 XGBoost gain xgboost 

CF-VI ├Ś ŌĆö intrinsic VI econml 

Table 2. Methods compared in the simulation studies. The Folds column denotes the number of cross-fitting folds used to generate pseudo-outcomes ╦åŽäi; CausalStabSel 

and CF-VI operate directly on ( X, Y, Z ) and perform their own internal cross-fitting. For CausalStabSel , IPSS, and KO, slashed entries indicate linear/nonlinear configurations; for KO, lasso coefdiff and glmnet coefdiff are the corresponding knockoff statistics from the knockoff R package. CF-VI uses the variable importance scores intrinsic to the causal forest. All methods are implemented using Python packages except knockoff .CF-VI rank covariates by their respective importance scores and select the top |E| . The top-|E| rule provides these two methods with the oracle benefit of knowing the true number of effect modifiers, which they would not have in practice; their reported performance therefore represents an upper bound on what is achievable from the underlying rankings. As a direct consequence of selecting exactly |E| variables, their TPR and FDR are mechanically related by FDR = 1 ŌłÆ TPR. Performance is summarized by the true positive rate (TPR) and false discovery rate (FDR), defined as in Section 1, averaged across the 200 trials. For CausalStabSel , IPSS, KO, and BH, we plot mean TPR and mean FDR as functions of ╬▒. The diagonal dashed line in the FDR panels serves as a reference for perfect nominal control; a method achieves control if its empirical FDR curve lies on 

> 14

Figure 2. Linear results: Confounding variables. Top and bottom rows show mean TPR and mean FDR (averaged over 200 trials); the diagonal dashed line indicates perfect nominal FDR control. Left: |C| = 0 (RCT). Middle: |C| = 5. Right: |C| = 10. 

Figure 3. Nonlinear results: Confounding variables. As in Figure 2 but in the nonlinear setting. or below this line. For Lasso, XGB-VI, and CF-VI, mean TPR and mean FDR are displayed as horizontal lines. 

> 15

5.3. Results. Figures 2 and 3 report results in the linear and nonlinear settings, respectively, as the number of confounders varies from 0 (RCT) to 10. The headline finding is consistent across both settings: CausalStabSel is the only method that maintains empirical FDR at or below the nominal level ╬▒ uniformly across confounding regimes, and it does so without sacrificing power relative to the other FDR-controlling alternatives. Figure 2 shows results in the linear setting. The empirical FDR of CausalStabSel lies on or below the diagonal across the full range of target levels and is essentially unchanged as the number of confounders increases from 0 to 10. The other FDR-controlling methods are anti-conservative across all three regimes: IPSS plateaus at empirical FDR near 0.5, KO rises above 0.7, and BH exceeds 0.5 once ╬▒ Ōēź 0.1. The non-FDR-controlling baselines, Lasso and CF-VI, produce empirical FDR around 0.8 and 0.5, respectively. Despite its conservatism in FDR, CausalStabSel attains TPR comparable to the best alternatives, reaching approximately 0.85 by ╬▒ = 0 .1 and matching BH, KO, and Lasso in the high-╬▒ regime while substantially exceeding CF-VI and the plateaued IPSS curve. Figure 3 shows the corresponding nonlinear results. The qualitative pattern is preserved: 

CausalStabSel is again the only method that controls FDR uniformly across confounding regimes. 

CausalStabSel attains the highest TPR among methods with valid FDR control: by ╬▒ = 0 .2its TPR exceeds 0.85, surpassing the other FDR-controlling methods. The non-FDR-controlling baselines (Lasso, XGB-VI, CF-VI) achieve TPR between 0.5 and 0.8 but at empirical FDR levels of 0.3 to 0.85. The improvement of CausalStabSel over other methods, such as IPSS, in the nonlinear setting is consistent with the difficulty of CATE estimation being more pronounced when the underlying response surface is nonlinear, which the cross-fitted design of CausalStabSel is explicitly intended to address. Additional experiments varying sample size n, dimension p, number of effect modifiers |E| , number of prognostic variables |P| , covariate correlation Žü, signal-to-noise ratio, and prognostic strength a

are reported in Section S2. The patterns observed in Figures 2 and 3 are broadly consistent with those additional results. 6. Application 

We apply CausalStabSel to two real-world datasets: a randomized controlled trial (RCT) and an observational study. The RCT data come from AmgenŌĆÖs PRIME trial, which evaluates the addition of a monoclonal-antibody therapy to standard chemotherapy in patients with previously untreated metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) (Douillard et al., 2010). The observational data come from the Pennsylvania birth-records study of maternal smoking and infant birthweight, a publicly available subset of the data used by Cattaneo (2010). The objective in both settings is to assess the behavior of CausalStabSel on real data with partially known structure. 

6.1. PRIME Randomized Trial. PRIME is a multicenter, open-label, randomized phase 3 trial comparing panitumumab ŌĆöa fully human anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodyŌĆöplus FOLFOX4 chemotherapy to FOLFOX4 alone in mCRC (Douillard et al., 2010). The trial demonstrated a PFS benefit confined to KRAS wild-type patients, later refined by extended-RAS analyses to patients without mutations in KRAS or NRAS exons 2ŌĆō4 (Douillard et al., 2013). Patient-level data were obtained through Project Data Sphere (Green et al., 2015). 

> 16

The analytic sample consists of N = 862 patients with p = 30 baseline covariates spanning demo-graphics, clinical features, mutation biomarkers, and laboratory values; the outcome is progression-free survival at 365 days, treated as a binary landmark. Several covariates are highly correlated (Figure S1). The data are split into a discovery sample ( N = 603, 70%) and a held-out inference sample ( N = 259, 30%); an 80/20 split is used as a sensitivity analysis. As a baseline, plain AIPW regression on the discovery sample finds 2ŌĆō4 covariates significant at p < 0.05 univariately and 6ŌĆō7 multivariately (Supplementary Material Section S3). 

6.1.1. Causal Stability Selection Results. We run CausalStabSel with: (i) DR-learner pseudo-outcomes with Ridge nuisance models and 5-fold cross-fitting; (ii) LASSO as the main selector and Gradient Boosting (GB) as a sensitivity check; (iii) B = 500 subsamples, ╬┤ = 2, subsample size ndisc /4, and a q-value threshold of 0 .10. CausalStabSel selects five effect modifiers: platelets, BMMTR1 (KRAS exon 2), BMMTR3 (KRAS exon 4), age, and lactate dehydrogenase. The four-feature core (BMMTR1, BMMTR3, age, platelets) is selected in all four configurations of split ratio and selector (Supplementary Material Section S3). Recovering BMMTR1 (KRAS exon 2) and BMMTR3 (KRAS exon 4) provides a calibration check: KRAS mutations are the canonical predictors of resistance to anti-EGFR therapy and motivated the trialŌĆÖs original subgroup analysis (Douillard et al., 2010, 2013). The three additional selectionsŌĆöplatelets, age, and lactate dehydrogenaseŌĆöhave established but less canonical associations with anti-EGFR response: elevated platelet counts mark systemic inflammation and angiogenesis pathways partially independent of EGFR signaling, while age and LDH are recognized prognostic factors with documented associations with treatment response. The goal of this application, however, is to assess the methodŌĆÖs behavior, not to advance new clinical claims. For corroboration, we run held-out inference using the BLP-on-CATE specification of Chernozhukov et al. (2025): regressing the estimated CATE on each de-meaned modifier individually, with HC1 robust standard errors. The estimated ATE is essentially zero ( ŌłÆ0.016, 95% CI [ ŌłÆ0.144 , 0.112]), consistent with the trialŌĆÖs well-known finding that benefit is confined to the KRAS wild-type subgroup (Douillard et al., 2010). Higher baseline platelet counts are associated with a smaller treatment effect (coefficient ŌłÆ0.0014, 95% CI [ ŌłÆ0.0024 , ŌłÆ0.0004]); the other selected features do not reach significance in the held-out inference. This may reflect limited statistical power in the small held-out sample ( ninf = 259), especially for KRAS exon-4 mutations (prevalent in < 5% of patients), but the possibility that some selections do not replicate cannot be ruled out. 

6.2. Birthweight Observational Study. The observational analysis uses data from Cattaneo (2010), a study of the effect of maternal smoking on infant birthweight drawn from Pennsylvania vital statistics birth records. The dataset has become a standard benchmark for evaluating causal-inference methods in observational settings (Di Francesco, 2026). The data used here are a publicly available random sample of the original. The analytic sample consists of N = 4 ,642 observations with p = 15 baseline covariates spanning maternal and paternal demographics, parity, marital status, and prenatal behaviors; the outcome is infant birthweight in grams (continuous), and the treatment is maternal smoking during pregnancy, with prevalence 18 .6%. Several covariates are highly correlated (Figure S2), notably between maternal and paternal characteristics under assortative mating (Mother White / Father White, r = 0 .85) and between mechanically related parity variables (Birth order / First baby, r = ŌłÆ0.70). The data are split into a discovery sample ( N = 3 ,249, 70%) and a held-out inference sample ( N = 1 ,393, 30%); an 80/20 split is used as a sensitivity analysis. As a baseline, plain AIPW regression on 

> 17

the discovery sample finds 3ŌĆō7 covariates significant at p < 0.05 univariately and zero significant covariates multivariately (Supplementary Material Section S3). 

6.2.1. Causal Stability Selection Results. We run CausalStabSel with the same configuration as in the PRIME application: DR-learner pseudo-outcomes with Ridge nuisance models and 5-fold cross-fitting; LASSO as the selector; B = 500 subsamples, ╬┤ = 2, subsample size ndisc /4, and a 

q-value threshold of 0 .10. CausalStabSel selects two effect modifiers: Mother age and First baby; both are selected in the 70/30 and 80/20 splits (Supplementary Material Section S3). Sensitivity-analysis results using Gradient Boosting as the selector are also reported in the Supplementary Material. Both Mother age and First baby have established associations with smoking-related birthweight reduction in the epidemiological literature: older mothers tend to be exposed to lower cumulative smoking dose and to have better-developed uterine vasculature; nulliparous women have less developed uterine and placental vasculature than multiparous women, potentially compounding the harm from smoking-induced vasoconstriction. The goal of this application, however, is to assess the methodŌĆÖs behavior, not to advance new clinical claims. For corroboration, we run held-out inference using the BLP-on-CATE specification of Chernozhukov et al. (2025): regressing the estimated CATE on each de-meaned modifier individually, with HC1 robust standard errors. The estimated ATE is ŌłÆ266g (95% CI [ ŌłÆ331 , ŌłÆ202]), consistent with the consensus epidemiological estimate of a 200ŌĆō300g smoking penalty and providing a calibration check on the AIPW pseudo-outcomes. In the 70/30 inference sample, Mother age (coefficient ŌłÆ14 .9g per year, 95% CI [ ŌłÆ26 .3, ŌłÆ3.5]) and First baby (coefficient +145 .8g, 95% CI [17 .0, 274 .6]) both reach significance. Neither modifier retains significance in the 80/20 split, likely reflecting limited power in the smaller held-out sample ( ninf = 929 vs. 1 ,393). Treatment-effect heterogeneity is detected here against a strongly significant negative ATE, a regime distinct from PRIME and complementary as a test of the methodŌĆÖs behavior. 

6.3. Application remarks. Together, these applications demonstrate CausalStabSel on two complementary regimes. PRIME involves a near-null average treatment effect, where heterogeneity is the substantive finding and recovering the canonical KRAS modifier serves as calibration. The birthweight study involves a strongly significant negative ATE, where heterogeneity is detected against a clear treatment effect and the estimate of the ATE itself provides an independent calibration of the pseudo-outcomes. In both cases CausalStabSel identifies a parsimonious set of effect modifiers with established literature support, and held-out BLP-on-CATE inference provides corroboration for at least a subset of selections. 7. Discussion 

We introduced CausalStabSel , a method for effect modifier discovery that combines cross-fitted CATE estimation with integrated path stability selection. The procedure accommodates arbitrary treatment effect estimators and arbitrary base selectors, and produces a selection set with an explicit, non-asymptotic upper bound on the expected number of false positives. Our theoretical results connect the bias of the estimated selection probabilities directly to the convergence rate of the underlying CATE estimator, establishing a quantitative link between treatment effect estimation and effect modifier discovery. Across a comprehensive simulation grid and two real-world applications spanning a randomized oncology trial and an observational study of maternal smoking, 

CausalStabSel consistently controls false discovery while maintaining competitive power. 

> 18

Several extensions follow naturally from the framework developed here. The selection probability machinery applies, with appropriate modification, to subgroup discovery, time-varying treatments, selection subspaces and settings with interference, where the relevant heterogeneity object differs from the CATE but the cross-fitted stability selection structure is preserved (Zhang et al., 2025). On the inferential side, post-selection inference for the effect modifiers identified by CausalStabSel 

(e.g., building on the held-out BLP-on-CATE strategy used in our applications, but with formal guarantees) would convert discovery into estimation with valid coverage. We leave these directions for future work. 

References 

David H Alexander and Kenneth Lange. Stability selection for genome-wide association. Genetic Epidemiology , 35(7):722ŌĆō728, 2011. Susan Athey and Guido Imbens. Recursive partitioning for heterogeneous causal effects. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 113(27):7353ŌĆō7360, 2016. Rina Foygel Barber and Emmanuel J Cand` es. Controlling the false discovery rate via knockoffs. 

Annals of Statistics , 43(5):2055ŌĆō2085, 2015. Falco J Bargagli-Stoffi, Riccardo Cadei, Kwonsang Lee, and Francesca Dominici. Causal rule ensemble: Interpretable discovery and inference of heterogeneous treatment effects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09036 , 2020. Falco J Bargagli-Stoffi, Costanza Tort┬┤ u, and Laura Forastiere. Heterogeneous treatment and spillover effects under clustered network interference. Annals of Applied Statistics , 19(1):28, 2025. Cl┬┤ ement B┬┤ enard and Julie Josse. Variable importance for causal forests: breaking down the heterogeneity of treatment effects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03369 , 2023. Y. Benjamini and Y. Hochberg. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Statistical Methodology) , pages 289ŌĆō300, 1995. Philippe Boileau, Siyuan Leng, Mark J van der Laan, Sandrine Dudoit, and Maya L Petersen. A nonparametric framework for treatment effect modifier discovery in high dimensions. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Statistical Methodology) , 87(1):157ŌĆō183, 2025. doi: 10.1093/jrsssb/qkae090. Leo Breiman. Random forests. Machine Learning , 45(1):5ŌĆō32, 2001. Mattias Cattaneo. Efficient semiparametric estimation of multi-valued treatment effects under ignorability. Journal of Econometrics , 155(2):138ŌĆō154, 2010. Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 785ŌĆō794, 2016. Victor Chernozhukov, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Christian Hansen, Whitney Newey, and James Robins. Double/debiased machine learning for treatment and structural parameters. Econometrics Journal , 21(1):C1ŌĆōC68, 2018. Victor Chernozhukov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, and Iv┬┤ an Fern┬┤ andez-Val. FisherSchultz lecture: Generic machine learning inference on heterogeneous treatment effects in randomized experiments, with an application to immunization in India. Econometrica , 93(4):11211164, 2025. A Dechartres, EG Bond, J Scheer, C Riveros, I Atal, and P Ravaud. Reporting of statistically significant results at ClinicalTrials.gov for completed superiority randomized controlled trials. 

BMC Medicine , 14(1):192, nov 2016. doi: 10.1186/s12916-016-0740-1. Riccardo Di Francesco. Aggregation trees. Econometric Reviews , pages 1ŌĆō26, 2026. Jean-Yves Douillard, Salvatore Siena, James Cassidy, Josep Tabernero, Ronald Burkes, Mario Barugel, Yves Humblet, Gy┬© orgy Bodoky, David Cunningham, Jacek Jassem, et al. Randomized, 

> 19

phase iii trial of panitumumab with infusional fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin (folfox4) versus folfox4 alone as first-line treatment in patients with previously untreated metastatic colorectal cancer: the prime study. Journal of clinical oncology , 28(31):4697ŌĆō4705, 2010. Jean-Yves Douillard, Kelly S Oliner, Salvatore Siena, Josep Tabernero, Ronald Burkes, Mario Barugel, Yves Humblet, Gyorgy Bodoky, David Cunningham, Jacek Jassem, et al. PanitumumabŌĆō folfox4 treatment and ras mutations in colorectal cancer. New England Journal of Medicine , 369 (11):1023ŌĆō1034, 2013. Qingliang Fan, Yu-Chin Hsu, Robert P Lieli, and Yichong Zhang. Estimation of conditional average treatment effects with high-dimensional data. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics , 40(1): 313ŌĆō327, 2022. S Gates and E Ealing. Reporting and interpretation of results from clinical trials that did not claim a treatment difference: Survey of four general medical journals. BMJ Open , 9(9):e024785, sep 2019. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-024785. Angela K Green, Katherine E Reeder-Hayes, Robert W Corty, Ethan Basch, Mathew I Milowsky, Stacie B Dusetzina, Antonia V Bennett, and William A Wood. The project data sphere initiative: accelerating cancer research by sharing data. The oncologist , 20(5):464ŌĆōe20, 2015. Oliver J Hines, Karla Diaz-Ordaz, and Stijn Vansteelandt. Variable importance measures for heterogeneous treatment effects. Biometrics , 81(4):ujaf140, 2025. Paul W Holland. Statistics and causal inference. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 81 (396):945ŌĆō960, 1986. Edward H Kennedy. Towards optimal doubly robust estimation of heterogeneous causal effects. 

Electronic Journal of Statistics , 17(2):3008ŌĆō3049, 2023. Michael R Kosorok and Eric B Laber. Precision medicine. Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application , 6(1):263ŌĆō286, 2019. S┬© oren R K┬© unzel, Jasjeet S Sekhon, Peter J Bickel, and Bin Yu. Metalearners for estimating heterogeneous treatment effects using machine learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 116(10):4156ŌĆō4165, 2019. Nicolai Meinshausen and Peter B┬© uhlmann. Stability selection. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Statistical Methodology) , 72(4):417ŌĆō473, 2010. Omar Melikechi and Jeffrey W Miller. Integrated path stability selection. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 121(553):454ŌĆō464, 2026. Omar Melikechi, David B Dunson, and Jeffrey W Miller. Nonparametric IPSS: fast, flexible feature selection with false discovery control. Bioinformatics , 41(5):btaf299, 2025. Paul R Rosenbaum and Donald B Rubin. The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal effects. Biometrika , 70(1):41ŌĆō55, 1983. Donald B Rubin. Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized studies. 

Journal of educational Psychology , 66(5):688, 1974. Rajen D Shah and Richard J Samworth. Variable selection with error control: another look at stability selection. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Statistical Methodology) , 75 (1):55ŌĆō80, 2013. Heejun Shin, Antonio Linero, Michelle Audirac, Kezia Irene, Danielle Braun, and Joseph Antonelli. Treatment effect heterogeneity and importance measures for multivariate continuous treatments. 

The Annals of Applied Statistics , 19(3):1847ŌĆō1867, 2025. John D Storey. The positive false discovery rate: a Bayesian interpretation and the q-value. The Annals of Statistics , 31(6):2013ŌĆō2035, 2003. Lu Tian, Ash A Alizadeh, Andrew J Gentles, and Robert Tibshirani. A simple method for estimating interactions between a treatment and a large number of covariates. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 109(508):1517ŌĆō1532, 2014. 

> 20

Robert Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) , 58(1):267ŌĆō288, 1996. Stefan Wager and Susan Athey. Estimation and inference of heterogeneous treatment effects using random forests. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 113(523):1228ŌĆō1242, 2018. Michael J Weiss, Howard S Bloom, and Thomas Brock. A conceptual framework for studying the sources of variation in program effects. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management , 33(3): 778ŌĆō808, 2014. Brian D Williamson, Peter B Gilbert, Noah R Simon, and Marco Carone. A general framework for inference on algorithm-agnostic variable importance. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 118(543):1645ŌĆō1658, 2023. Bin Yu. Stability. Bernoulli , 19(4):1484ŌĆō1500, 2013. doi: 10.3150/13-BEJSP14. Xiaozhu Zhang, Jacob Bien, and Armeen Taeb. Quantifying uncertainty and stability among highly correlated predictors: a subspace perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.06760 , 2025. Qingyuan Zhao, Dylan S Small, and Ashkan Ertefaie. Selective inference for effect modification via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Statistical Methodology) , 84(2): 382ŌĆō413, 2022. Hui Zou. The adaptive lasso and its oracle properties. Journal of the American Statistical Association ,101(476):1418ŌĆō1429, 2006. 

> 21

Supplementary Material for ŌĆ£Causal Stability SelectionŌĆØ 

Falco J. Bargagli-Stoffi, Omar Melikechi S1. Proofs 

S1.1. Section 4.1 proofs. 

Proof of Theorem 1. Set ╬” j = ╬” j (XA, Žä ) and ╦å╬”j = ╬” j (XA, ╦åŽäAc ) and define the events 

Ej (╬╗) = {j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗(XA, Žä (XA)) } = {╬”j Ōēź ╬╗};╦åEj (╬╗) = {j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗(XA, ╦åŽäAc (XA)) } = { ╦å╬”j Ōēź ╬╗}.

The following sequence of equalities and inequalities constitutes the full proof and is presented without interruption for clarity. Details about the individual steps are provided subsequently. In the following, B1 Ōłå B2 = ( B1 \ B2) Ōł¬ (B2 \ B1) denotes the symmetric difference of sets B1 and B2.

|E (╦å ŽĆj (╬╗)) ŌłÆ ŽĆj (╬╗)| = P( ╦åEj (╬╗)) ŌłÆ P (Ej (╬╗)) 

Ōēż P

 ╦åEj (╬╗) Ōłå Ej (╬╗)



Ōēż P



|╬”j ŌłÆ ╬╗| Ōēż | ╦å╬”j ŌłÆ ╬”j |



Ōēż P (|╬”j ŌłÆ ╬╗| Ōēż LŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź)= E [P (|╬”j ŌłÆ ╬╗| Ōēż LŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź) | ╦åŽäAc ]

Ōēż E (2 M L Ōłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź) .

The first equality is immediate. The first inequality holds because, for any sets B1 and B2,

|P(B1) ŌłÆ P(B2)| = [P(B1 \ B2) + P(B1 Ōł® B2)] ŌłÆ [P(B2 \ B1) + P(B2 Ōł® B1)] 

= |P(B1 \ B2) ŌłÆ P(B2 \ B1)|Ōēż P(B1 Ōłå B2),

the last step holding by the triangle inequality. The second inequality holds because ╦åEj (╬╗) Ōłå Ej (╬╗)is the union of the events ╦åEj (╬╗) \ Ej (╬╗) = {╬”j < ╬╗ Ōēż ╦å╬”j } = {0 < ╬╗ ŌłÆ ╬”j Ōēż ╦å╬”j ŌłÆ ╬”j }

Ej (╬╗) \ ╦åEj (╬╗) = { ╦å╬”j < ╬╗ Ōēż ╬”j } = { ╦å╬”j ŌłÆ ╬”j < ╬╗ ŌłÆ ╬”j Ōēż 0}.

Together, these imply ╦åEj (╬╗) Ōłå Ej (╬╗) ŌŖå {| ╬”j ŌłÆ ╬╗| Ōēż | ╦å╬”j ŌłÆ ╬”j |} , from which the second inequality follows. The third inequality is a direct consequence of the Lipschitz condition, Assumption 3. The subsequent equality is a direct application of the law of total expectation, conditioning on the estimated CATE function ╦åŽäAc . The critical observation is that ╦åŽäAc is trained on samples in Ac, while ╬”j depends only on samples in A. In particular, letting C = LŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź, we have 

P (|╬”j ŌłÆ ╬╗| Ōēż LŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź) = 

Z ╬╗+C╬╗ŌłÆC

f (Žå | ╦åŽäAc ) dŽå Ōēż M (╬╗ + C ŌłÆ [╬╗ ŌłÆ C]) = 2 M C, 

where the conditional density of ╬” j given ╦åŽäAc , f (Žå | ╦åŽäAc ), is uniformly bounded above by M by assumption. Applying the conditional expectation E[┬Ę | ╦åŽäAc ] establishes the result. Ō¢Ī

> S1

Let ╦åŽĆŌłŚ

> j,m

(╬╗) = 12B

P2Bb=1 1



j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗(XAb , Žä (XAb )) 



denote the estimated oracle selection probability, i.e., the version of ╦å ŽĆj,m (╬╗) that would result if Žä were directly observed. 

Lemma S1.1 (Variance bound) . Var (╦å ŽĆŌłŚ

> j,m

(╬╗)) Ōēż 18B + m2 

> n

for any B, j, ╬╗, and m Ōēż ŌīŖ n/ 2Ōīŗ.Proof. Fix B, j, ╬╗, and m, and set ╦åŽĆŌłŚ = ╦åŽĆŌłŚ

> j,m

(╬╗). For b Ōłł [2 B], define EŌłŚ 

> b

= {j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗(XAb , Žä (XAb )) },where each Ab is drawn as in Algorithm 1. Then Var(╦å ŽĆŌłŚ) = Var 12B

> 2B

X

> b=1

1(EŌłŚ 

> b

)

!

= 14B22BX

> b=1

Var( 1(EŌłŚ 

> b

)) + 14B2

X

> b╠Ė=bŌĆ▓

Cov( 1(EŌłŚ 

> b

), 1(EŌłŚ 

> bŌĆ▓

)) 

Ōēż 18B + 14B2

X

> b╠Ė=bŌĆ▓

Cov( 1(EŌłŚ 

> b

), 1(EŌłŚ 

> bŌĆ▓

)) .

(S1.1) The inequality holds because Var (1(E)) Ōēż 1/4 for any event E. For the covariance terms, fix b╠Ė = bŌĆ▓

and set C = {Ab Ōł® AbŌĆ▓ = Ōłģ} . By conditioning on C and Cc,Cov( 1(EŌłŚ 

> b

), 1(EŌłŚ 

> bŌĆ▓

)) = P(EŌłŚ 

> b

Ōł® EŌłŚ 

> bŌĆ▓

) ŌłÆ P(EŌłŚ 

> b

)P(EŌłŚ 

> bŌĆ▓

)= P(EŌłŚ 

> b

Ōł® EŌłŚ 

> bŌĆ▓

| Cc)P(Cc) + P(EŌłŚ 

> b

Ōł® EŌłŚ 

> bŌĆ▓

| C)P(C) ŌłÆ P(EŌłŚ 

> b

)P(EŌłŚ 

> bŌĆ▓

)

Ōēż P(Cc) + P(EŌłŚ 

> b

Ōł® EŌłŚ 

> bŌĆ▓

| C) ŌłÆ P(EŌłŚ 

> b

)P(EŌłŚ 

> bŌĆ▓

)= P(Cc) + P(EŌłŚ 

> b

| C)P(EŌłŚ 

> bŌĆ▓

| C) ŌłÆ P(EŌłŚ 

> b

)P(EŌłŚ 

> bŌĆ▓

)= P(Cc).

The third equality holds because, under the assumption of iid samples, EŌłŚ 

> b

and EŌłŚ 

> bŌĆ▓

are conditionally independent given Ab and AbŌĆ▓ with Ab Ōł® AbŌĆ▓ = Ōłģ. The iid assumption further implies that the corresponding conditional probabilities do not depend on the realized subsets, so the factorization remains valid when conditioning only on C. For the last equality, the iid assumption implies that 

P(EŌłŚ 

> b

| Ab = S) is the same for all S ŌŖå [n] of size m. Moreover, the conditional distribution of Ab

given C is uniform over subsets of [ n] of size m. Hence P(EŌłŚ 

> b

| C) = P(EŌłŚ 

> b

), and similarly for bŌĆ▓.To bound P(Cc), observe that P(i Ōłł AbŌĆ▓ | Ab) Ōēż m/n for every i Ōłł Ab. Specifically, if b and bŌĆ▓

belong to the same complementary pair in Algorithm 1, then Ab Ōł® AbŌĆ▓ = Ōłģ and the probability is 0; otherwise AbŌĆ▓ is drawn independently of Ab, so P(i Ōłł AbŌĆ▓ | Ab) = P(i Ōłł AbŌĆ▓ ) = m/n . Applying the tower property and a union bound, 

P(Cc) = E[P(Ab Ōł® AbŌĆ▓╠Ė = Ōłģ | Ab)] Ōēż E

 X

> iŌłłAb

P(i Ōłł AbŌĆ▓ | Ab)



Ōēż E

 X

> iŌłłAb

mn



= m2

n .

Thus, Cov( 1(EŌłŚ 

> b

), 1(EŌłŚ 

> bŌĆ▓

)) Ōēż m2/n for all b╠Ė = bŌĆ▓. Plugging this into Equation S1.1 gives Var(╦å ŽĆŌłŚ) Ōēż 18B + 2B(2 B ŌłÆ 1) m2

4B2n Ōēż 18B + m2

n . Ō¢Ī

> S2

Proof of Theorem 2. Let Lf be the Lipschitz constant for f .

E| ╦åE╬│ Ōłå E╬│ 

> ŌłŚ

| Ōēż E j : R f (ŽĆj ) d╬╝ ŌłÆ ╬│ Ōēż R f (╦å ŽĆj ) ŌłÆ f (ŽĆj ) d╬╝ 

=

> p

X

> j=1

P  ╬Ą Ōēż R f (╦å ŽĆj ) ŌłÆ f (ŽĆj ) d╬╝ 

Ōēż

> p

X

> j=1

1

╬Ą E R f (╦å ŽĆj ) ŌłÆ f (ŽĆj ) d╬╝ 

Ōēż Lf

╬Ą

> p

X

> j=1

Z

E|╦åŽĆj ŌłÆ ŽĆj | d╬╝ 

Ōēż Lf

╬Ą

> p

X

> j=1

Z

E|╦åŽĆj ŌłÆ E(╦å ŽĆj )| + |E(╦å ŽĆj ) ŌłÆ ŽĆj | d╬╝ 

Ōēż Lf

╬Ą

> p

X

> j=1

Z q

Var(╦å ŽĆj ) + |E(╦å ŽĆj ) ŌłÆ ŽĆj | d╬╝ 

By Theorem 1, we have |E( ╦åŽĆj ) ŌłÆ ŽĆj | Ōēż 2M L EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź for all j. For the variance term, fix j and ╬╗

and set ╦å ŽĆ = ╦å ŽĆj (╬╗). Define ╦åEb = {j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗(XAb , ╦åŽäAcb )} and Eb = {j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗(XAb , Žä )}. Then Var(╦å ŽĆ) = Var(╦å ŽĆŌłŚ + ╦å ŽĆ ŌłÆ ╦åŽĆŌłŚ) Ōēż 2Var(╦å ŽĆŌłŚ) + 2Var(╦å ŽĆ ŌłÆ ╦åŽĆŌłŚ)An upper bound for the first term, Var(╦å ŽĆŌłŚ), is provided by Lemma S1.1. For the second term, Var(╦å ŽĆ ŌłÆ ╦åŽĆŌłŚ) Ōēż E|╦åŽĆ ŌłÆ ╦åŽĆŌłŚ|

= E 12B

> 2B

X

> b=1

1( ╦åEb) ŌłÆ 1(Eb)

Ōēż 12B

> 2B

X

> b=1

E 1( ╦åEb) ŌłÆ 1(Eb)

= P( ╦åEbŌłåEb)

Ōēż 2M L EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź.

The first inequality holds because |╦åŽĆ ŌłÆ ╦åŽĆŌłŚ| Ōēż 1 and hence Var ( ╦åŽĆ ŌłÆ ╦åŽĆŌłŚ) Ōēż E[( ╦åŽĆ ŌłÆ ╦åŽĆŌłŚ)2] Ōēż E|╦åŽĆ ŌłÆ ╦åŽĆŌłŚ|.The second inequality is the triangle inequality. The second equality holds because |1( ╦åEb) ŌłÆ 1(Eb)| =

1( ╦åEbŌłåEb), and the third inequality was established in the proof of Theorem 1. Therefore, 

pVar(╦å ŽĆ) Ōēż

r 14B + 2m2

n + 4 M L EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź

and hence, 

E| ╦åE╬│ Ōłå E╬│ 

> ŌłŚ

| Ōēż Lf p╬Ą

Z r 14B + 2m2

n + 4 M L EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź + 2 M L EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź

!

d╬╝ 

= Lf p╬Ą

r 14B + 2m2

n + 4 M L EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź + 2 M L EŌłź╦åŽäAc ŌłÆ Žä Ōłź

!

.

The equality holds since ╬╝ is a probability measure on ╬ø and the integrand is independent of ╬╗. Ō¢Ī

> S3

S1.2. Section 4.2 proofs. Throughout this section, we fix a subsample size m Ōēż ŌīŖ n/ 2Ōīŗ and suppress m from notation. For example, we write ╦åŽĆj (╬╗) instead of ╦åŽĆj,m (╬╗). The following quantities are used in the proofs of Theorems 3 and 4. Fix B Ōēź 2. For ╬╗ Ōłł ╬ø and j Ōłł [p], define the simultaneous selection probabilities 

╦å╬Šj (╬╗) = 1

B

> B

X

> b=1

1



j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗(XA2bŌłÆ1 , ╦åŽäAc 

> 2bŌłÆ1

)



1



j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗(XA2b , ╦åŽäAc 

> 2b

)



,╬Šj (╬╗) = 1

B

> B

X

> b=1

1



j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗(XA2bŌłÆ1 , Žä )



1



j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗(XA2b , Žä )



.

Since each summand lies in {0, 1}, a direct expansion of ╦å╬Šj (╬╗) gives 0 Ōēż 1

B

> B

X

> b=1



1 ŌłÆ 1 j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗(XA2bŌłÆ1 , ╦åŽäAc 

> 2bŌłÆ1

) 

1 ŌłÆ 1 j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗(XA2b , ╦åŽäAc 

> 2b

)

= 1 ŌłÆ 2╦å ŽĆj (╬╗) + ╦å╬Šj (╬╗),

and hence ╦åŽĆj (╬╗) Ōēż 12 (1 + ╦å╬Šj (╬╗)). Replacing ╦åŽä with Žä yields the oracle analogue ╦åŽĆŌłŚ 

> j

(╬╗) Ōēż 12 (1 + ╬Šj (╬╗)). Since f is nondecreasing and satisfies f   12 (1 + x) = x3 for x Ōēź 0, 

f (╦å ŽĆj (╬╗)) Ōēż f

 12 (1 + ╦å╬Šj (╬╗)) 



= ╦å╬Šj (╬╗)3, (S1.2) and likewise f  ╦åŽĆŌłŚ 

> j

(╬╗) Ōēż ╬Šj (╬╗)3.For readability, define Ōłår =

n

k Ōłł ZB : kb Ōēź 0, PBb=1 kb = r

o

,

and Nk = PBb=1 1(kb╠Ė = 0), and denote multinomial coefficients by   rk1,...,k B

 = r!/(k1! ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę kB !). The following lemma is the CausalStabSel analogue of Lemma S2.1 in Melikechi and Miller (2026). The proof is the same multinomial expansion argument, the only change being that it invokes the integrated form of Assumption 5 rather than the pointwise form used in that work. 

Lemma S1.2. Fix r Ōłł N. If Assumption 5a holds for all rŌĆ▓ Ōłł [r], then 

max 

> jŌłłE c

Z

> ╬ø

E

h ╦å╬Šj (╬╗)ri

╬╝(d╬╗ ) Ōēż 1

Br

X

> kŌłłŌłår

 rk1, . . . , k B

 Z 

> ╬ø

 ╦åq(╬╗)

p

2Nk

╬╝(d╬╗ ). (S1.3) 

If Assumption 5b holds for all rŌĆ▓ Ōłł [r], then (S1.3) holds with ╬Šj and q(╬╗) in place of ╦å╬Šj and ╦åq(╬╗).Proof. Fix j Ōłł E c and define 0 0 = 1. Let 

Ub(╬╗) = 1



j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗(XA2bŌłÆ1 , ╦åŽäAc 

> 2bŌłÆ1

)



1



j Ōłł ╦åS╬╗(XA2b , ╦åŽäAc 

> 2b

)



so that ╦å╬Šj (╬╗) = BŌłÆ1 PBb=1 Ub(╬╗). By the multinomial theorem, ╦å╬Šj (╬╗)r = 1

Br

X

> kŌłłŌłår

 rk1, . . . , k B

 BY

> b=1

Ub(╬╗)kb = 1

Br

X

> kŌłłŌłår

 rk1, . . . , k B

 BY

> b=1

Ub(╬╗)1(kb╠Ė =0) .

> S4

The last equality holds because Ub(╬╗) Ōłł { 0, 1}, and hence Ub(╬╗)kb = Ub(╬╗) whenever kb > 0. Next, since Assumption 5a holds for all rŌĆ▓ Ōēż r and since every k Ōłł Ōłår has at most r nonzero entries, 

Z

> ╬ø

E

 BY

> b=1

Ub(╬╗)1(kb╠Ė =0) 



╬╝(d╬╗ ) = 

Z

> ╬ø

P



j Ōłł \ 

> b:kb╠Ė=0

h ╦åS╬╗(XA2bŌłÆ1 , ╦åŽäAc 

> 2bŌłÆ1

) Ōł® ╦åS╬╗(XA2b , ╦åŽäAc 

> 2b

)

i

╬╝(d╬╗ )

Ōēż

Z

> ╬ø

 ╦åq(╬╗)

p

2Nk

╬╝(d╬╗ ).

Therefore, 

Z

> ╬ø

E

h ╦å╬Šj (╬╗)ri

╬╝(d╬╗ ) = 1

Br

X

> kŌłłŌłår

 rk1, . . . , k B

 Z 

> ╬ø

E

 BY

> b=1

Ub(╬╗)1(kb╠Ė =0) 



╬╝(d╬╗ )

Ōēż 1

Br

X

> kŌłłŌłår

 rk1, . . . , k B

 Z 

> ╬ø

 ╦åq(╬╗)

p

2Nk

╬╝(d╬╗ ).

Taking the maximum over j Ōłł E c gives (S1.3). Ō¢Ī

Proof of Theorem 3. Fix j Ōłł E c and ╬│ > 0. By MarkovŌĆÖs inequality, 

P(j Ōłł ╦åE╬│ ) = P

Z 

> ╬ø

f (╦å ŽĆj (╬╗)) ╬╝(d╬╗ ) Ōēź ╬│



Ōēż 1

╬│

Z

> ╬ø

E[f (╦å ŽĆj (╬╗))] ╬╝(d╬╗ ) Ōēż 1

╬│

Z

> ╬ø

E

h ╦å╬Šj (╬╗)3i

╬╝(d╬╗ ),

where the last inequality holds by (S1.2). Applying Lemma S1.2 with r = 3 under Assumption 5a, 

P(j Ōłł ╦åE╬│ ) Ōēż 1

╬│B 3

X

> kŌłłŌłå3

 3

k1, . . . , k B

 Z 

> ╬ø

 ╦åq(╬╗)

p

2Nk

╬╝(d╬╗ ).

Therefore, 

E| ╦åE╬│ Ōł® E c| = X

> jŌłłE c

P(j Ōłł ╦åE╬│ ) Ōēż p╬│B 3

X

> kŌłłŌłå3

 3

k1, . . . , k B

 Z 

> ╬ø

 ╦åq(╬╗)

p

2Nk

╬╝(d╬╗ ).

It remains to evaluate the sum over Ōłå 3 = {k Ōłł ZB : kb Ōēź 0, PBb=1 kb = 3 }. The elements of Ōłå 3

partition into three groups according to the number of nonzero entries, Nk:

ŌĆó Nk = 1: a single entry equal to 3. There are B such k, each with   3

> k1,...,k B

 = 1. 

ŌĆó Nk = 2: one entry equal to 1, another to 2. There are B(B ŌłÆ 1) such k, each with   3

> k1,...,k B

 = 3. 

ŌĆó Nk = 3: three entries equal to 1. There are  B

> 3

 such k, each with   3

> k1,...,k B

 = 6. Substituting, 

E| ╦åE╬│ Ōł® E c| Ōēż p╬│B 3

Z

> ╬ø

B

 ╦åq(╬╗)

p

2

+ 3 B(B ŌłÆ 1) 

 ╦åq(╬╗)

p

4

+ B(B ŌłÆ 1)( B ŌłÆ 2) 

 ╦åq(╬╗)

p

6

╬╝(d╬╗ )= 1

╬│

Z

> ╬ø

╦åq(╬╗)2

B2p + 3( B ŌłÆ 1)╦å q(╬╗)4

B2p3 + (B ŌłÆ 1)( B ŌłÆ 2)╦å q(╬╗)6

B2p5 ╬╝(d╬╗ ). Ō¢Ī

Proof of Theorem 4. Since ╦åE╬│ Ōł® E c ŌŖå ( ╦åE╬│ Ōłå EŌłŚ 

> ╬│

) Ōł¬ (EŌłŚ 

> ╬│

Ōł® E c), taking expectations gives 

E| ╦åE╬│ Ōł® E c| Ōēż E| ╦åE╬│ Ōłå EŌłŚ 

> ╬│

| + |E ŌłŚ 

> ╬│

Ōł® E c| Ōēż Žü + |E ŌłŚ 

> ╬│

Ōł® E c|,

> S5

where EŌłŚ 

> ╬│

is deterministic so no expectation is needed on the second term, and the second inequality is Theorem 2. It remains to bound |E ŌłŚ 

> ╬│

Ōł® E c|.Applying 1(x Ōēź ╬│) Ōēż x/╬│ for x Ōēź 0, 

|E ŌłŚ 

> ╬│

Ōł® E c| = X

> jŌłłE c

1

Z 

> ╬ø

f (ŽĆj (╬╗)) ╬╝(d╬╗ ) Ōēź ╬│



Ōēż p╬│ max 

> jŌłłE c

Z

> ╬ø

f (ŽĆj (╬╗)) ╬╝(d╬╗ ).

We now bound f (ŽĆj (╬╗)) using JensenŌĆÖs inequality. The function f (x) = (2 x ŌłÆ 1) 3 1(x Ōēź 12 ) is convex on [0 , 1]: it is identically zero on [0 , 12 ], satisfies f ŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ (x) = 24(2 x ŌłÆ 1) Ōēź 0 on [ 12 , 1], and has f ŌĆ▓( 12 ) = 0 from both sides. Since ╦å ŽĆŌłŚ 

> j

(╬╗) is an unbiased estimator of ŽĆj (╬╗), JensenŌĆÖs inequality gives 

f (ŽĆj (╬╗)) = f  E[╦å ŽĆŌłŚ 

> j

(╬╗)]  Ōēż Ef (╦å ŽĆŌłŚ 

> j

(╬╗))  Ōēż E╬Šj (╬╗)3 ,

where the last step uses the oracle analogue of (S1.2) . Integrating over ╬ø and applying Lemma S1.2 with r = 3 under Assumption 5b yields the same multinomial expansion as in the proof of Theorem 3, with q(╬╗) in place of ╦å q(╬╗). Combining the two bounds gives (4.11). Ō¢Ī

S2. Additional Simulation Results 

In this section, we report additional simulation results. 

Figure S1. K-fold cross-fitting with different K. Results for the K-fold cross-fitting approach to effect modifier discovery described in ?? . While going from 2-folds to 5 shows mild improvements in performance, there is almost no difference between 

K = 5 and 10. In all cases, the FDR is poorly controlled. 

> S6

Figure S2. CausalStabSel with different CATE estimators . CausalStabSel is implemented with six different CATE estimators: two versions each of a DR-learner, a T-learner, and an X-learner, where one version uses ridge regression, and the other uses XGBoost. Data are simulated according to the baseline simulation designs described in Section 5.1; see also the bold parameter values in Table 1. For each implementation of CausalStabSel , only the CATE estimator varies; all other inputs are held constant. 

> S7

Figure S3. Linear results: sample size, n.

Figure S4. Nonlinear results: sample size, n.

> S8

Figure S5. Linear results: number of covariates, p.

Figure S6. Nonlinear results: number of covariates, p.

> S9

Figure S7. Linear results: number of effect modifiers, |E| .

Figure S8. Nonlinear results: number of effect modifiers, |E| .

> S10

Figure S9. Linear results: number of prognostic variables, |P| .

Figure S10. Nonlinear results: number of prognostic variables, |P| .

> S11

Figure S11. Linear results: covariate correlation, Žü.

Figure S12. Nonlinear results: covariate correlation, Žü.

> S12

Figure S13. Linear results: signal-to-noise ratio, SNR .

Figure S14. Nonlinear results: signal-to-noise ratio, SNR .

> S13

Figure S15. Linear results: prognostic strength, a.

Figure S16. Nonlinear results: prognostic strength, a.

> S14

S3. Additional Application Details 

S3.1. PRIME Randomized Trial. 

S3.1.1. Covariate Correlation Structure The covariate matrix exhibits two clusters of mutation indicators with r > 0.90, namely BMMTR2/BMMTR15 and BMMTR5/BMMTR16. Such correlation structure resembles a setting in which standard selection procedures are known to over-flag. AGE 

> B_ECOG
> B_WEIGHT
> B_HEIGHT
> LIVERMET
> B_METANM
> DIAGMONS
> BMMTR1
> BMMTR2
> BMMTR3
> BMMTR4
> BMMTR5
> BMMTR7
> BMMTR15
> BMMTR16
> Albumin
> Alkaline Phosphatase
> Carcinoembryonic Antigen
> Creatinine
> Hemoglobin
> Lactate Dehydrogenase
> Platelets
> White Blood Cells
> SEX_Male
> RACE_Black or African American
> RACE_Hispanic or Latino
> RACE_Other
> HISSUBTY_Mucinous
> HISSUBTY_Other
> HISSUBTY_Unknown

AGE 

B_ECOG 

B_WEIGHT 

B_HEIGHT 

LIVERMET 

B_METANM 

DIAGMONS 

BMMTR1 

BMMTR2 

BMMTR3 

BMMTR4 

BMMTR5 

BMMTR7 

BMMTR15 

BMMTR16 

Albumin 

Alkaline Phosphatase 

Carcinoembryonic Antigen 

Creatinine 

Hemoglobin 

Lactate Dehydrogenase 

Platelets 

White Blood Cells 

SEX_Male 

RACE_Black or African American 

RACE_Hispanic or Latino 

RACE_Other 

HISSUBTY_Mucinous 

HISSUBTY_Other 

HISSUBTY_Unknown 

Covariate Correlation Matrix Study 309 (70/30 Discovery Set) 

1.00 

0.75 

0.50 

0.25 

0.00 

0.25 

0.50 

0.75 

1.00 

> Pearson r

Figure S1. Covariate correlation matrix on the discovery set ( n = 603). 

S15 Covariate 1 Covariate 2 r

BMMTR5 BMMTR16 +0 .911 BMMTR2 BMMTR15 +0 .905 B HEIGHT SEX Male +0 .500 Platelets White Blood Cells +0 .476 B WEIGHT B HEIGHT +0 .454 B WEIGHT SEX Male +0 .437 Alkaline Phosphatase Lactate Dehydrogenase +0 .426 Hemoglobin Platelets ŌłÆ0.403 Albumin Hemoglobin +0 .359 Albumin White Blood Cells ŌłÆ0.333 

Table S1. Top pairwise correlations among covariates on the discovery set. 

S3.1.2. Pre-Selection Analysis As a baseline reference for CausalStabSel , we run standard AIPW regressions on the discovery sample. AIPW pseudo-outcomes are computed via 5-fold cross-fitting with LogisticRegressionCV for both propensity and outcome models, propensity clipped to [0 .10 , 0.90], and AIPW scores winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Univariate AIPW regressions. Each covariate is tested individually: AIPW i = ╬▒ + ╬▓(Xj ŌłÆ ┬»Xj ) + ╬Ąi

with HC1 robust standard errors. 

Table S2. Univariate pre-selection: covariates significant at p < 0.05.                          

> 70/30 (n= 603) 80/20 (n= 689)
> Covariate Coef pCoef p
> Carcinoembryonic Antigen ŌłÆ0.0000 0.0044 ŌłÆ0.0000 0.0185 BMMTR1 ŌłÆ0.1703 0.0331 ŌłÆ0.1508 0.0447 Platelets ŌłÆ0.0004 0.1926 ŌłÆ0.0007 0.0188 BMMTR3 ŌłÆ0.3537 0.1686 ŌłÆ0.3706 0.0359 Total significant at 5%: 2/30 (70/30), 4/30 (80/20)

Multivariate AIPW regressions. All 30 covariates included simultaneously: AIPW i = ╬▒ +P30  

> j=1

╬▓j (Xij ŌłÆ ┬»Xj ) + ╬Ąi with HC1 robust standard errors. 

> S16

Table S3. Multivariate pre-selection: covariates significant at p < 0.05. 

70/30 (n = 603) 80/20 (n = 689) 

Covariate Coef p Coef p

BMMTR15 ŌłÆ0.9347 < 0.001 ŌłÆ0.8875 < 0.001 BMMTR2 +0 .9239 0.0035 +0 .9062 0.0030 Carcinoembryonic Antigen ŌłÆ0.0000 0.0047 ŌłÆ0.0000 0.0271 BMMTR1 ŌłÆ0.2159 0.0154 ŌłÆ0.2118 0.0069 Lactate Dehydrogenase ŌłÆ0.0001 0.0194 ŌłÆ0.0001 0.0164 BMMTR4 ŌłÆ0.4676 0.0461 ŌłÆ0.4729 0.0408 Total significant at 5%: 6/30 (70/30), 7/30 (80/20) 

Plain regression finds 2ŌĆō4 covariates significant at 5% univariately and 6ŌĆō7 multivariately. Many of these associations are likely driven by the correlation structure documented above: in particular, BMMTR2 and BMMTR15 ( r = 0 .91) are both flagged in the multivariate analysis. 

S3.1.3. Causal Stability Selection Results We report selection results separately for the two selectors and the two split ratios. Shaded rows denote features selected in both the 70/30 and 80/20 splits; unshaded rows denote features selected in only one of the two configurations. 

Table S4. Selected features ŌĆö DR-learner (Ridge) / LASSO ( q < 0.10). 

q-values Selected Feature 70/30 80/20 70/30 80/20 BMMTR1 0.039 0.032 Ō£ō Ō£ō

BMMTR3 0.041 0.032 Ō£ō Ō£ō

AGE 0.039 0.091 Ō£ō Ō£ō

Platelets 0.039 0.032 Ō£ō Ō£ō

Lactate Dehydrogenase 0.039 0.184 Ō£ō

BMMTR4 0.102 0.093 Ō£ō

> 70/30: 5 selected. 80/20: 5 selected. The four-feature core (BMMTR1, BMMTR3, AGE, Platelets) is invariant; LDH and BMMTR4 swap depending on the split.
> S17

Table S5. Selected features ŌĆö DR-learner (Ridge) / GB ( q < 0.10). 

q-values Selected Feature 70/30 80/20 70/30 80/20 AGE 0.017 0.041 Ō£ō Ō£ō

BMMTR1 0.017 0.033 Ō£ō Ō£ō

BMMTR3 0.017 0.033 Ō£ō Ō£ō

Platelets 0.017 0.033 Ō£ō Ō£ō

B WEIGHT 0.018 0.052 Ō£ō Ō£ō

Lactate Dehydrogenase 0.017 0.069 Ō£ō Ō£ō

Hemoglobin 0.054 0.162 Ō£ō

White Blood Cells 0.175 0.072 Ō£ō

> 70/30: 7 selected. 80/20: 7 selected. The six-feature core is invariant across splits; Hemoglobin and WBC swap depending on the split. GB selects more features than LASSO at the same threshold.

Across both selectors and both split ratios, BMMTR1, BMMTR3, AGE, and Platelets are selected in all four configurations. BMMTR2 and BMMTR15, both flagged by multivariate pre-selection, are not selected by CausalStabSel under any configuration; the canonical KRAS-exon-2 and exon-4 indicators (BMMTR1, BMMTR3) are. This pattern (e.g., exclusion of demonstrably collinear proxies, retention of canonical effect modifiers) is consistent with the FDR-control behavior established in the simulations. 

S3.1.4. Held-out Inference (70/30 split) For each selected feature j, we estimate the BLP of the CATE on Xj on the inference sample using ╦åŽä (xi) = ╬▒ + ╬▓j (Xj,i ŌłÆ ┬»Xj ) + ╬Ąi with HC1 robust standard errors. 

Table S6. Inference results, DR-learner / LASSO core, 70/30 split ( ninf = 259). 

Feature Coef SE 95% CI 

Platelets ŌłÆ0.0014 0.0005 [ŌłÆ0.002 , ŌłÆ0.000] BMMTR1 ŌłÆ0.1198 0.1232 [ŌłÆ0.363 , 0.123] BMMTR3 +0 .0729 0.2426 [ŌłÆ0.405 , 0.551] AGE +0 .0075 0.0056 [ŌłÆ0.004 , 0.019] Lactate Dehydrogenase ŌłÆ0.0001 0.0001 [ŌłÆ0.0003 , 0.0001] ATE = ŌłÆ0.016 (SE = 0 .065); 95% CI [ ŌłÆ0.144 , 0.112] The estimated ATE is essentially zero, consistent with the original PRIME finding that benefit was confined to the KRAS wild-type subgroup. Among the selected modifiers, only platelets has a 95% CI excluding zero. Treatment-effect heterogeneity coexists with a null average effect, the regime in which discovery of effect modifiers is most informative. 

S3.2. Birthweight Observational Study. 

> S18 mmarried
> mhisp
> fhisp
> foreign
> alcohol
> deadkids
> mage
> medu
> fage
> fedu
> monthslb
> order
> mrace
> frace
> fbaby

mmarried 

mhisp 

fhisp 

foreign 

alcohol 

deadkids 

mage 

medu 

fage 

fedu 

monthslb 

order 

mrace 

frace 

fbaby 

1.00 -0.13 -0.13 0.02 -0.08 0.00 0.44 0.36 0.45 0.46 0.06 0.03 0.40 0.48 -0.11 

-0.13 1.00 0.70 0.38 -0.02 0.01 -0.10 -0.12 -0.06 -0.12 0.01 0.05 0.05 0.00 -0.04 

-0.13 0.70 1.00 0.30 -0.02 -0.01 -0.13 -0.15 -0.07 -0.15 -0.00 0.04 0.01 0.04 -0.04 

0.02 0.38 0.30 1.00 -0.01 -0.00 0.02 -0.07 0.02 -0.01 -0.00 0.05 -0.12 -0.11 -0.03 

-0.08 -0.02 -0.02 -0.01 1.00 0.03 0.03 -0.04 -0.03 -0.04 0.02 0.06 -0.10 -0.09 -0.05 

0.00 0.01 -0.01 -0.00 0.03 1.00 0.20 0.04 0.10 0.01 0.11 0.15 -0.05 -0.04 -0.14 

0.44 -0.10 -0.13 0.02 0.03 0.20 1.00 0.41 0.56 0.33 0.38 0.32 0.17 0.19 -0.32 

0.36 -0.12 -0.15 -0.07 -0.04 0.04 0.41 1.00 0.32 0.56 0.01 -0.12 0.19 0.22 0.02 

0.45 -0.06 -0.07 0.02 -0.03 0.10 0.56 0.32 1.00 0.54 0.19 0.17 0.18 0.30 -0.19 

0.46 -0.12 -0.15 -0.01 -0.04 0.01 0.33 0.56 0.54 1.00 0.03 -0.07 0.20 0.34 -0.02 

0.06 0.01 -0.00 -0.00 0.02 0.11 0.38 0.01 0.19 0.03 1.00 0.41 -0.02 0.00 -0.62 

0.03 0.05 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.15 0.32 -0.12 0.17 -0.07 0.41 1.00 -0.11 -0.09 -0.70 

0.40 0.05 0.01 -0.12 -0.10 -0.05 0.17 0.19 0.18 0.20 -0.02 -0.11 1.00 0.85 0.05 

0.48 0.00 0.04 -0.11 -0.09 -0.04 0.19 0.22 0.30 0.34 0.00 -0.09 0.85 1.00 0.02 

-0.11 -0.04 -0.04 -0.03 -0.05 -0.14 -0.32 0.02 -0.19 -0.02 -0.62 -0.70 0.05 0.02 1.00 

Covariate Correlation Matrix Birthweight (70/30 Discovery Set) 

1.00 

0.75 

0.50 

0.25 

0.00 

0.25 

0.50 

0.75 

1.00 

> Pearson r

Figure S2. Covariate correlation matrix on the 70/30 discovery set ( n = 3 ,249). 

Table S7. Top pairwise correlations among covariates on the 70/30 discovery set. 

Covariate 1 Covariate 2 r

Mother White Father White +0 .848 Mother Hispanic Father Hispanic +0 .704 Birth order First baby ŌłÆ0.704 Months since last birth First baby ŌłÆ0.623 Mother education Father education +0 .557 Mother age Father age +0 .556 Married Father White +0 .479 Married Father education +0 .459 Married Father age +0 .455 Married Mother age +0 .439 

S3.2.1. Covariate Correlation Structure The covariate matrix exhibits two distinct correlation clusters: assortative mating between maternal and paternal characteristics (Mother/Father White, 

r = 0 .85; Mother/Father Hispanic, r = 0 .70; parental education and age, r Ōēł 0.56), and mechanically related parity variables (Birth order / First baby, r = ŌłÆ0.70; Months since last birth / First baby, 

S19 r = ŌłÆ0.62). Marital status correlates with multiple paternal characteristics ( r Ōēł 0.44ŌĆō0 .48). These correlations are substantially higher than in the PRIME data and may drive spurious effect modifier discovery in standard regression. 

S3.2.2. Pre-Selection Analysis As a baseline reference for CausalStabSel , we run standard AIPW re-gressions on the discovery sample. AIPW pseudo-outcomes are computed via 5-fold cross-fitting with 

LogisticRegressionCV for the propensity model and RidgeCV for the outcome model, propensity clipped to [0 .10 , 0.90], and AIPW scores winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Univariate AIPW regressions. Each covariate is tested individually: AIPW i = ╬▒ + ╬▓(Xj ŌłÆ ┬»Xj ) + ╬Ąi

with HC1 robust standard errors. 

Table S8. Univariate pre-selection: covariates significant at p < 0.10.                                       

> 70/30 (n= 3 ,249) 80/20 (n= 3 ,713)
> Covariate Coef (g) pCoef (g) p
> Mother age ŌłÆ9.80.010 ŌłÆ13 .1<0.001 First baby +106 .60.011 +128 .60.001 Mother White ŌłÆ136 .80.030 ŌłÆ147 .10.012 Birth order ŌłÆ36 .50.052 ŌłÆ52 .20.005 Father White ŌłÆ107 .60.065 ŌłÆ111 .70.043 Married ŌłÆ92 .90.063 ŌłÆ101 .30.032 Months since last birth ŌłÆ1.30.075 ŌłÆ1.40.034 Significant at 5%: 3/15 (70/30), 7/15 (80/20). At 10%: 7/15 (70/30), 8/15 (80/20).

Multivariate AIPW regressions. All 15 covariates included simultaneously: AIPW i = ╬▒ +P15  

> j=1

╬▓j (Xij ŌłÆ ┬»Xj ) + ╬Ąi with HC1 robust standard errors. 

Table S9. Multivariate pre-selection summary.            

> 70/30 (n= 3 ,249) 80/20 (n= 3 ,713) Significant at 5% 0/15 0/15 Significant at 10% 0/15 1/15 (Mother White, p= 0 .082)

Plain regression on the discovery set finds 3ŌĆō7 covariates significant at 5% univariately, but no 

covariates survive multivariate adjustment in either split. This pattern ŌĆō many univariate hits collapsing in multivariate analysis ŌĆō is a well-known artifact of correlated covariate structure: shared variance is partialled out when covariates enter the regression jointly, deflating individual t-statistics. The contrast with the PRIME data, where multivariate regression revealed more signals than univariate, illustrates that standard regression can fail in opposite directions depending on the correlation geometry of the design. 

S3.2.3. Causal Stability Selection Results We report selection results for the two selectors and the two split ratios. Shaded rows denote features selected in both the 70/30 and 80/20 splits; unshaded rows denote features selected in only one of the two configurations. 

> S20

Table S10. Selected features ŌĆö DR-learner (Ridge) / LASSO ( q < 0.10). 

q-values Selected Feature 70/30 80/20 70/30 80/20 Mother age 0.053 0.040 Ō£ō Ō£ō

First baby 0.053 0.040 Ō£ō Ō£ō

> Both splits select the same two features.

Table S11. Selected features ŌĆö DR-learner (Ridge) / GB ( q < 0.10). 

q-values Selected Feature 70/30 80/20 70/30 80/20 Mother age 0.028 0.027 Ō£ō Ō£ō

Birth order 0.028 0.027 Ō£ō Ō£ō

Foreign-born 0.028 0.036 Ō£ō Ō£ō

Mother White 0.042 0.043 Ō£ō Ō£ō

Months since last birth 0.028 0.041 Ō£ō Ō£ō

First baby ŌĆö 0.033 Ō£ō

Married ŌĆö 0.039 Ō£ō

Father age 0.028 ŌĆö Ō£ō

Father education 0.063 ŌĆö Ō£ō

Mother education 0.089 ŌĆö Ō£ō

> 70/30: 8 selected. 80/20: 7 selected. The five-feature core is invariant across splits; Father age, Father education, and Mother education appear only in 70/30, while First baby and Married appear only in 80/20.

The two selectors differ in selectivity: LASSO retains two features (Mother age, First baby), while GB retains seven to eight, including the parity correlate Birth order ( r = ŌłÆ0.70 with First baby) and the demographic correlates Mother White, Foreign-born, and Months since last birth. Mother age is selected in all four configurations of split ratio and selector. The parity signal appears as First baby under LASSO and as Birth order under GB; the two indicators are mechanically related and capture the same underlying phenomenon. Both selectors correctly avoid Father White ( r = 0 .85 with Mother White), an obvious assortative-mating proxy that would inflate naive multivariate regression. 

S3.2.4. Held-out Inference For each selected feature j, we estimate the BLP of the CATE on Xj on the inference sample using ╦å Žä (xi) = ╬▒ + ╬▓j (Xj,i ŌłÆ ┬»Xj ) + ╬Ąi with HC1 robust standard errors. 

Table S12. Inference results, DR-learner / LASSO selections, 70/30 split ( ninf =1,393). 

Feature Coef (g) SE 95% CI 

Mother age ŌłÆ14 .9 5.8 [ŌłÆ26 .3, ŌłÆ3.5] First baby +145 .8 65 .7 [17 .0, 274 .6] ATE = ŌłÆ266 .4g (SE = 32 .7); 95% CI [ ŌłÆ330 .5, ŌłÆ202 .3]