Title: Stein-Encoder: A White-Box Supervised Encoder via Stein Identities in Multi-Modal Studies

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25734v1

Published Time: Tue, 26 May 2026 02:10:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Stein-Encoder: A White-Box Supervised Encoder via Stein Identities in Multi-Modal Studies 

Jiarui Zhang *1 , Shuoxun Xu *2 , Jiasheng Shi †3, and Xinzhou Guo †4

> 1

School of Mathematics, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China 

> 2

Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA 

> 3

School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China 

> 4

Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China 

Abstract 

In multi-modal biomedical research, integrating high-dimensional genomic data with clinical baselines is essential for precision medicine. However, standard deep neural network approaches often entangle these modalities, obscuring the specific predictive impact of genetic features and leading to possibly suboptimal predictive performance. Motivated by the landmark METABRIC cohort primary breast tumors study, we propose the Stein-Encoder, a white-box supervised framework designed to isolate the genetic signal driving clinical outcomes conditional on nui-sance covariates. By leveraging Stein’s method and residualization techniques, our approach constructs an interpretable single index that summarizes relevant biological heterogeneity while flexibly incorporating clinical factors and can be used to improve downstream prediction. We es-tablish theoretical guarantees for identification, consistency and efficiency improvement. Applied to the METABRIC cohort, the Stein-Encoder outperforms unsupervised benchmarks in predic-tive accuracy. Crucially, it achieves structural disentanglement by revealing response-specific biological mechanisms: we find that tumor size is driven primarily by mitotic networks, whereas prognostic indices rely on a distinct proliferation-versus-immune axis. This work contributes a unified, computationally efficient framework that bridges statistical rigor with the representa-tional power of neural networks, enabling interpretable, task-specific and efficient compression of multi-modal health data for a wide range of precision medicine applications, beyond biomarker discovery. 

Keywords: Deep Neural Network; Interpretable; Downstream Prediction; Stein Identity 

# 1 Introduction 

1.1 Motivations and Objectives 

The rapid development of Artificial Intelligence (AI), particularly the emergence of Deep Neural Network (DNN), has fundamentally transformed data-driven discovery across various scientific disci-plines, exemplified by the accurate prediction of 3D protein structures via AlphaFold (Jumper et al., 2021) and the accelerated discovery of crystals in materials science (Merchant et al., 2023). While the application of DNN has achieved remarkable success in scientific discoveries, how to achieve dual  

> 1*

Jiarui Zhang and Shuoxun Xu contributed equally to this work.  

> 2†

Co-corresponding authors: Jiasheng Shi (shijiasheng@cuhk.edu.cn), Xinzhou Guo (xinzhoug@ust.hk). 

1

> arXiv:2605.25734v1 [stat.AP] 25 May 2026

requirements of prediction accuracy and interpretability with DNN, a black-box method, remains a critical challenge. This question is particularly important in multi-modal studies where researchers are not only interested in utilizing different modalities to improve outcome prediction accuracy but also in interpreting the impact of a certain modality of interest (LeCun et al., 2015). A motivating example of this paper is the METABRIC study (Curtis et al., 2012), a multi-modal cohort of breast cancer. In the METABRIC study, two scientific tasks are of great interest, (1) predict key clinical outcomes based on two different modalities, clinical biomarkers and high-dimensional gene expression profiles and (2) interpret the impact of gene expression modality on clinical outcomes (Kristensen et al., 2014). The first task integrates clinical baselines with genomic profiles to capture patient heterogeneity beyond uni-modal assessments, achieving more accurate clinical prediction (Hasin et al., 2017). The second task aims to isolate actionable genetic drivers, ensuring the clinical transparency required for high-stakes medical decision-making (Rudin, 2019). Simply using standard end-to-end DNNs to fuse the two modalities may deliver neither optimal pre-dictive performance nor desired interpretability (Ching et al., 2018). First, in the high-dimensional regime, these over-parameterized models are prone to overfitting stochastic genomic noise rather than learning robust predictive signals, and may suffer suboptimal prediction (Wainberg et al., 2018). Second, DNN tends to entangle the strong, baseline signals from clinical variables with the subtle, high-dimensional signals from gene expression in complex nonlinear ways, and cannot inform practitioners how gene expression profiles impact clinical outcomes. To address the two scientific tasks in the METABRIC study, or more broadly, multi-modal studies, the key is to construct a white-box encoder which is interpretable and sufficiently com-presses the modality of interest. In AI, an encoder refers to a mapping from raw inputs into a low-dimensional representation and is typically embedded into DNN (Goodfellow et al., 2016). In the community of AI, numerous encoders have been proposed. For example, Variational Autoen-coders (VAE) (Kingma and Welling, 2013) and Denoising Autoencoders (DAE) (Vincent et al., 2008) are widely utilized to learn robust latent representations. However, AI-based encoders are typically black-box and focus on improvement of general prediction ability. The compressed values of predictors from AI-based encoders fail to disentangle the incremental predictive information of the genetic modality from the baseline effects of the nuisance clinical covariates and are thus not interpretable in the METABRIC study. Moreover, the prediction ability of AI-based encoders may not be optimal in the METABRIC study due to their unsupervised nature. In sum, the AI-based encoder is not suitable for the scientific tasks considered in the METABRIC study and may not help achieve the dual requirements of prediction accuracy and interpretability in multi-modal studies. In this paper, we aim to utilize appropriate statistical principle to define a white-box encoder in multi-modal studies, specifically for the METABRIC study with high-dimensional genetic fea-tures. To define encoders, several statistical principles have been considered. Based on Principal Component Analysis, several encoders have been proposed but they are unsupervised and prioritize variance over predictive relevance (Wainberg et al., 2018). Based on Sufficient Dimension Reduction (SDR), Sliced Inverse Regression (SIR) (Li, 1991) and Sliced Average Variance Estimation (SAVE) (Cook and Weisberg, 1991) target the predictive subspace but struggle to handle the conditioning on complex, mixed-type nuisance modalities effectively. Therefore, a new statistical principle which can account for different modalities in the supervised setting is needed. Ultimately, we wish the newly defined white-box encoder can enhance prediction accuracy and interpretability of DNN in the METABRIC study. 21.2 An Overview of Research Methods and Findings 

To achieve accurate prediction and transparent interpretation in the METABRIC study, we propose a new data analysis pipeline as illustrated in Figure 1. The new data analysis pipeline is based on a novel white-box encoder constructed by Stein’s identity, a statistical principle widely used in distributional approximation and variational inference (Stein, 1981). Specifically, we propose a Stein-Encoder to summarize and interpret the impact of genetic expressions modality to cancer-related outcomes, and apply DNN to the encoder and clinical modality to predict the outcomes. Unlike classical encoders, the Stein-Encoder is a white-box encoder capturing the intrinsic structural information of the modality of interest, genetic expression profile, while rigorously accounting for the context provided by the auxiliary modality, clinical biomarkers. Under mild assumptions, we show that the Stein-Encoder provides a single index which can be interpreted as a conditional genetic risk score and serves as a statistically optimal "pre-training" step which effectively reduces the dimensionality of the problem without information loss for downstream DNN (Rudin, 2019). The estimation consistency of the Stein-Encoder is also established in both low and high dimensions.                          

> Raw data
> (Y, X,Z)
> Step 1: Nuisance removal
> Fit Z|X∼ N (AX ,Σ),residuals Z′=Z−bAX
> Step 2: Stein-Encoder
> Stein identities with probes T(Y),estimate bγ, score t=bγ⊤Z
> Downstream DNN fΘ(·)
> same architecture, different inputs for each path
> proposed path
> input (X,bγ⊤Z)
> traditional path, input (X,Z)

Figure 1: Data analysis pipeline. With the proposed Stein-Encoder, the analysis of the multi-modal METABRIC breast cancer study is substantially facilitated. Specifically, we find that the Stein-Encoder significantly out-performs the unsupervised dimensionality reduction method PCA and standard neural networks in predicting key cancer-related outcomes. In the METABRIC study, the Stein-Encoder method reduces test MSE for tumor size from 140.5 (standard DNN) to 126.2 and increases R-squared for age at diagnosis from 0.59 to 0.64. In addition, compared with PCA, the learned genetic in-dex from Stein-Encoder exhibits a clearer monotone gradient in tumor size, NPI and nodal status and is enriched for proliferation and immune-related genes. This reveals a biologically coherent transcriptomic risk axis that PCA and black-box models fail to isolate. Moreover, we distinguish response-specific transcriptomic drivers, isolating a pure mitotic network (e.g., AURKB , FOXM1 )for tumor size while recovering a “proliferation vs. immune” axis (e.g., CD79A ) for NPI. This biolog-ical disentanglement contrasts with standard PCA, which captures only generic proliferation signals regardless of the clinical endpoint, demonstrating our method’s ability to uncover outcome-relevant heterogeneity. In summary, this work contributes a unified framework for multi-modal representation learning that bridges the gap between statistical rigor and representational power. We provide a closed-form, computationally efficient estimator that acts as a plug-and-play module to enhance the per-formance of downstream neural networks by reducing input dimensionality and isolating relevant heterogeneity. By offering a transparent mechanism to fuse and interpret complex multi-modal 3data transforming raw associations into actionable biological insights, the Stein-Encoder advances the methodology for precision medicine and fosters the clinical trust required for deploying AI in high-stakes scientific domains, particularly the METABRIC study. 

Organization of the Paper. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the data and scientific task based on the METABRIC cohort and formalizes the multi-modal problem setup. Section 3 details the Stein-Encoder methodology, defining and interpreting the encoder, tailoring the encoder to the METABRIC study and deriving the unified estimation algorithm and use of the Stein-Encoder. Section 4 presents the theoretical properties, including identification, estimation consistency and asymptotic efficiency gain of Stein-Encoder. Section 5 evaluates the method’s performance through extensive numerical experiments. Section 6 demon-strates the practical application of the Stein-Encoder to real-world cancer data, comparing it against benchmark methods. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper with a discussion of implications and future research directions. 

Notation. Throughout the paper, we use E[·] to denote the expectation operator and ∇ for the gradient operator. For a vector v, ∥v∥2 denotes the Euclidean norm, and for high-dimensional analy-sis, ∥v∥0 denotes the sparsity level (number of non-zero elements). We denote γ⊗k = γ ⊗ γ ⊗ · · · ⊗ γ

| {z } 

> ktimes

as the k-th Kronecker power of the vector γ.

# 2 Data, Scientific Tasks and Problem Setup 

In this section, we first introduce the METABRIC study and the scientific tasks in this multi-modal study in Section 2.1. Then, we mathematically define the problem setup, illustrate the limitations of existing methods and discuss what type of encoder we seek in the multi-modal study in Section 2.2. 

2.1 Data and Scientific Tasks 

In this paper, we consider the Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium (METABRIC) cohort (Curtis et al., 2012) as the motivating example, which represents one of the largest and most comprehensively annotated collections of primary breast cancer specimens. In our analysis, after standard quality control procedures-specifically excluding subjects with missing response values and selecting the top 400 gene probes ranked by marginal variance, we retain approx-imately 1900 patients with complete data, and consider the following two modalities, (1) a nuisance modality with about 400 dimensions collecting several dozen clinical and copy-number covariates and (2) a high-dimensional genetic modality consisting of 400 highly variable gene expression probes from the Illumina HT-12 v3 platform. Unlike standard unimodal datasets, this cohort presents a complex multi-modal structure involving clinical phenotypes, structural genomic variations, and transcriptomic profiles. The scientific task of the study is to (1) predict cancer-related outcomes based on the two modalities and (2) interpret the impact of the genetic modality. The details of the modalities and cancer-related outcomes, and practical importance of the tasks are provided as follow. The first set of the study is denoted as the nuisance modality ( X). In the context of semi-parametric statistical inference, a "nuisance" parameter refers to a variable that is not the primary target of inference but must be accounted for to obtain unbiased estimates of the target param-eter (Robinson, 1988; Chernozhukov et al., 2018). Here, X comprises low-dimensional variables defining the heterogeneous biological background, including standard clinico-pathological factors (e.g., treatment status, tumor grade, and estrogen receptor status). Crucially, we also include Copy 4Number Aberrations (CNA) in this nuisance category. Although genomic in origin, CNAs represent discrete structural events (encoded as integers {− 2, −1, 0, 1, 2}) that drive baseline cellular states. As noted in integrative genomic analyses (Kristensen et al., 2014), controlling for these structural variations is essential to distinguish the functional regulation of mRNA expression from simple gene dosage effects. The second set of the study constitutes the primary feature modality ( Z), consisting of high-dimensional continuous gene expression profiles. We focus on a subset of genes exhibiting significant variability, serving as the candidate features for identifying functional drivers of disease progression. We analyze four clinical outcomes ( Y ): the Nottingham Prognostic Index (NPI) (Galea et al., 1992) and its individual components—tumor size and lymph node status—to disentangle their specific genetic associations. Additionally, we include age at diagnosis to capture age-dependent heterogeneity in tumor biology (Partridge et al., 2016). The practical importance of the study is two-fold. First, we will predict the clinical outcomes ( Y )by integrating the nuisance clinical background ( X) and the genetic information ( Z). Such predic-tion is important in the era of precision medicine because it moves beyond coarse anatomical staging to capture the underlying molecular heterogeneity, enabling more granular risk stratification and the tailoring of therapeutic interventions to individual biological profiles. Second, we will determine whether the high-dimensional genome ( Z) adds independent predictive value over the established clinical and structural factors ( X). While clinical variables provide a baseline for risk stratifica-tion, the core scientific question is to identify an interpretable index of gene expression that drives clinical outcomes conditional on the heterogeneous background. Isolating this signal is essential for discovering valid biomarkers that are not merely surrogates for known clinical confounders. 

2.2 Problem Setup 

We formalize the multi-modal prediction problem using the following mathematical notation. Let 

Y ∈ R denote the scalar response variable. The feature space consists of two distinct components: a vector of nuisance covariates X ∈ Rp, and a vector of genetic features Z ∈ Rq. Mathematically, the scientific objectives of this study translate into two distinct statistical challenges: (1) to learn the joint conditional expectation E[Y |X, Z] that minimizes generalization error; and (2) to identify the specific structural component of Z that drives variation in Y conditional on X, thereby disentangling the genetic impact from the confounding clinical baseline. In its most general form, without imposing specific structural assumptions, the data generating process encompassing these objectives can be expressed as: 

Y = g(X, Z) + ε, (1) where ε is a noise term independent of X and Z and g(·) is an unknown, potentially complex function capturing the underlying biological mechanism. Modern artificial intelligence (AI) approaches, particularly multi-modal DNN, offer powerful tools for approximating such complex functions. A direct approach typically involves concatenating 

X and Z into a single input vector for a DNN. While these "black-box" models often achieve high predictive accuracy by flexibly approximating g, they suffer from significant limitations in scientific discovery. The primary issue is the entanglement of features: such models tend to mix the strong, baseline signals from clinical variables X with the subtle, high-dimensional signals from Z

in complex nonlinear ways (Baltrušaitis et al., 2018). Consequently, it becomes nearly impossible to disentangle the specific contribution of the genetic modality from the clinical background. Moreover, the prediction might not be optimal as these over-parameterized models are prone to overfitting stochastic genomic noise rather than learning robust predictive signals (Wainberg et al., 2018). As emphasized by (Rudin, 2019), for high-stakes decisions in healthcare, reliance on opaque models is problematic; distinct and interpretable attribution of risk factors is required. 5To address this interpretability challenge while maintaining predictive power, we propose to structure the genetic component through a dimension reduction perspective. Specifically, our goal is to identify a predictive and interpretable linear encoder for the genetic features, denoted as 

γ⊤Z, where γ ∈ Rq is an unknown projection direction. By imposing this structure, we aim to conduct prediction and approximate the general relationship in (1) with DNN regressing Y on X

and γ⊤Z rather than X and Z directly. This choice of a linear encoder is theoretically grounded in quantitative genetics, where complex traits are often effectively modeled as the additive effects of many variants—a principle underpinning the success of Polygenic Risk Scores (PRS) (Visscher et al., 2017). The weights in γ thus provide a direct, interpretable measure of gene importance, striking a balance between biological plausibility and the statistical flexibility required to model clinical covariates. However, determining an interpretable and predictive linear encoder γ in the presence of a complex nuisance X presents a formidable challenge. Standard unsupervised methods, such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA), construct encoders by maximizing the marginal variance of 

Z and ignoring Y entirely; they therefore capture dominant technical or biological variation in Z but not necessarily the variation that is predictive for Y conditional on X. On the other hand, classical Sufficient Dimension Reduction (SDR) methods, such as Sliced Inverse Regression (SIR) (Li, 1991), target predictive directions but typically do not exploit the conditional structure of Z given X and cannot handle multi-modal data. These methods often rely on slicing or smoothing over the covariate distribution, which suffers from the curse of dimensionality and becomes technically intractable when 

X contains mixed discrete–continuous variables like CNAs (Chiaromonte et al., 2002). Furthermore, modern "black-box" explainability methods applied post hoc to complex models and AI-based encoders often fail to provide faithful explanations of the underlying mechanism (Rudin, 2019). Therefore, a new framework is required to bridge this gap. We seek an encoder that is (i) supervised, directly utilizing Y to identify predictive signals; (ii) conditional, built to encode Z

specifically after adjusting for the nuisance X; and (iii) white-box, where the weights γ arise from explicit estimation rather than opaque training. In our application, such an encoder γ⊤Z would function as an X-adjusted genetic risk score, capturing the incremental signal of gene expression beyond what is already explained by clinical factors. This conditional perspective is central to our study: it ensures that the learned direction captures novel genetic mechanisms rather than re-encoding known clinical effects. In the following section, we will rigorously define this encoder based on the conditional mean structure of the data and introduce a method based on Stein’s identity to estimate it. 

# 3 Methodology: The Stein-Encoder 

In this section, we begin by defining the encoder in a general population sense via conditional Stein kernel and providing an interpretation in Section 3.1. Then, we provide the specific choice of the Stein-Encoder to strike a balance between interpretability and tractability in Section 3.2. In the end, we proceed to derive tractable closed-form estimators under a conditional linear-Gaussian structure, present a unified algorithm for nuisance removal and index recovery, and show how we use the estimated Stein-Encoder in the METABRIC study. 

3.1 Stein-Encoder: Definition and Interpretation 

Let Hk(Z | X) be the k-th order conditional Stein kernel defined using the conditional density 

p(z | x) of Z given X = x, the specific form can be found in (Stein, 1981). The k-th order Stein-Encoder is defined as a projection of Z over the direction of the rank-one decomposition of the k-th 6Stein moment tensor Mk(T ) := E[ T (Y ) Hk(Z | X) ] as stated in Definition 3.1 where T is a probe function. Such a definition involves Y , X and Z, which can be viewed as an association strength between Y and Z conditional on X, and is thus different from PCA and SIR. 

Definition 3.1 (Stein-Encoder) . The k-th order Stein-Encoder is the scalar index: 

Enc k(Z) := γ⊤Z.

where γ is the rank-one decomposition of the k-th order Stein moment tensor Mk(T ) := E[ T (Y ) Hk(Z |

X) ] .

Under mild conditions, we can show that the Stein-Encoder sufficiently summarizes the impact of Z on Y after adjusting for X and can be interpreted as a statistically X-adjusted score of Z in predicting Y . In specific, consider the case where the relevant information in Z for predicting Y

(conditional on X) is captured entirely by a single linear projection β⊤Z for some unknown direction 

β ∈ Rq. Mathematically, this implies the conditional expectation satisfies: E[Y | X, Z] = E[Y |

X, β⊤Z]. Under this single-index assumption, the general data generating process Y = g(X, Z) + ε

introduced in (1) simplifies to the multi-modal single-index model summarizing the impact of the modality of interest into a single value: 

Y = f (X, β⊤Z) + ε, (2) where f is an unknown link function. Crucially, we claim that under this structural assumption, the Population Stein-Encoder γ defined in Definition 3.1 perfectly aligns with the true structural direction β (up to a sign flip). Therefore, the Stein-Encoder bears a statistical interpretation of 

X-adjusted score of Z in predicting Y

To understand why this alignment holds, we examine the components of the Stein moment 

Mk(T ). The core engine is the conditional Stein kernel Hk(Z | X). For the first order ( k = 1 ), this kernel is simply the negative conditional score function, H1(Z | X) = −∇ z log p(Z | X). Intuitively, weighting the features by this score function analytically “residualizes” Z against X. Under the model (2) and standard regularity conditions, a generalized integration by parts argument yields the Stein identity: 

Mk(T ) = E

 ∂k E{T (Y ) | X, Z}

∂(β⊤Z)k



· β⊗k. (3) This identity reveals that the observable moment tensor Mk(T ) is proportional to β⊗k. Therefore, the vector γ recovered from the decomposition must satisfy γ = ±β, ensuring that the Stein-Encoder correctly identifies the predictive index required for the model. In the context of our cancer application, the Stein-Encoder β⊤Z serves as an X-adjusted genetic risk score. Unlike PCA, which captures marginal variation in Z regardless of Y , or standard neural networks, which entangle X and Z, the Stein-Encoder explicitly isolates the genetic signal predictive of Y that is orthogonal to the clinical factors X. By leveraging the conditional score function, the method effectively filters out the nuisance variation explained by X, ensuring that the learned direction reflects valid biological heterogeneity rather than confounding clinical effects. The practical implementation of the Stein-Encoder requires navigating a fundamental trade-off between interpretability and estimability across three key design elements: (1) the order k, where higher orders ( k ≥ 3) theoretically capture complex dependencies but involve the statistical chal-lenge of estimating high-dimensional tensors; (2) the probe function T (Y ), which targets specific functionals of the conditional distribution but requires careful selection to prevent identification failure due to vanishing coefficients; and (3) the Stein kernel Hk(Z | X), where flexible nonpara-metric estimators of the conditional density p(z | x) maximize generality but suffer from instability 7in high dimensions compared to structured working models. Allowing arbitrary k, T , and p(z | x)

makes the interpretation of Enc k(Z) extremely broad (it becomes a general probe of conditional sensitivity), but estimation becomes infeasible. In practice, we need to restrict them appropriately to yield encoders that are both interpretable and accurately estimable in realistic sample sizes for the study of interest. The specific choice of the order, probe and stein kernel for the METABRIC study will be specified in Section 3.2. 

3.2 Stein-Encoder: Choice for METABRIC study 

In this subsection, to balance interpretability and tractability in the METABRIC analysis, we adopt a structured configuration defined by three specific choices: (1) Order: we restrict attention to k ∈ { 1, 2}, which is sufficient to capture dominant mean and volatility effects while avoiding the estimation instability associated with higher-order tensors; (2) Probe Dictionary: we utilize a versatile set of transformations T = {y, y 2, arctan( ay ), ay 2 

> 1+ ay 2

}, which is theoretically guaranteed to identify complex dependencies under the conditions established in Section C of the Supplementary Materials; and (3) Conditional Stein Kernel: we impose a conditional linear-Gaussian working model Z | X ∼ N (AX , Σ), which simplifies the score function to a linear transformation of the residuals Z−AX , thereby enabling closed-form estimation and explicitly isolating the genetic signal orthogonal to the clinical background. Motivated by the need to explicitly disentangle the high-dimensional features Z from the complex nuisance covariates X in a statistically stable way, we impose the following working model for Z | X.

Assumption 3.1 (Conditional Linear-Gaussian) . Conditional on X, the vector Z follows a multi-variate Gaussian distribution: 

Z | X ∼ N (AX , Σ), (4) where A ∈ Rq×p is an unknown coefficient matrix capturing the baseline effect of X on Z, and 

Σ ≻ 0 is an unknown covariance matrix. Under Assumption 3.1, the score function becomes explicit: H1(Z | X) = −Σ−1(Z − AX ).Plugging this into the general definition yields the following closed-form residual Stein moment tensor: 1st Order: ET (Y )Σ−1(Z − AX ) (5) 2nd Order: E

h

T (Y )Σ−1(Z − AX )( Z − AX )⊤Σ−1 − Σ−1 i

,

Under the multi-modal single-index model (2), these residual Stein moments exhibit a direct struc-tural alignment with the true index β. Specifically, the first-order moment is proportional to β,while the second-order moment is proportional to the rank-one matrix ββ ⊤. Consequently, the Stein-Encoder γ—obtained by standardizing the first-order vector or computing the leading eigen-vector of the second-order matrix—satisfies γ = ±β. This guarantees that the Stein-Encoder consistently identifies the genetic direction of interest; detailed derivations are provided in Section C of the Supplementary Materials. Assumption 3.1 is compatible with the METABRIC study, where the raw gene-expression mea-surements were converted to relative expression z-scores using the diploid ( CNA = 0 ) reference sample. After this processing, the marginal distribution of each gene is approximately standard normal by construction, which is further illustrated by Figure 3 in Section B.5 of the Supplemen-tary Materials. Moreover, the underlying Stein construction in Definition 3.1 only requires the conditional score s(z, x) = ∇z log p(z | x), so more general conditional models beyond Gaussian, 8such as conditional elliptical and generalized linear models, are possible in principle. However, a more general and flexible choice of the working model p(z | x) is typically at the cost of a more complex stein identity and a nonlinear score structure, which requires further study. The Gaussian case, besides practically relevant to the METABRIC study, is methodologically attractive with its simple closed-form estimators. Under correct specification, this structure supports the identification result γ = ±β and the generalization theory developed in Section 4. Under misspecification, the theoretical robustness and empirical improvements are still achieved as illustrated in Section B.3. Crucially, both identities depend only on low-order moments of the residuals Z − AX and the precision matrix Σ−1; they do not require estimating the unknown link function f . Under Assumption 3.1, this means that the population Stein-Encoder can be fully characterized in terms of X-residualized, whitened gene expression. In our application, the resulting index γ⊤Z can thus be interpreted as an X-adjusted, linearly weighted genetic risk score for the transformed outcome 

T (Y ), recovered from simple residual moments rather than from a black-box predictive model. 

3.3 Stein-Encoder: Estimation and Use 

In this subsection, we propose an algorithm to estimate the Stein-Encoder tailored for the METABRIC study in Section 3.2, and show how to use the estimated Stein-Encoder to help achieve the prediction and interpretation tasks considered in the METABRIC study. The estimation of the Stein-Encoder mainly consists of the following two steps, (1) estimate the Stein kernel and (2) select the probe and the order, as summarized in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 Unified Sequential Stein-Encoder  

> 1:

Input: Data (Y, X, Z); Ordered Probe List T = {T1, ...T 4}; Threshold τ1, τ2. 

> 2:

Step 1: Nuisance Removal  

> 3:

Estimate bA and bΩ via Algorithm 1 in Supplementary materials. Compute residuals bZ′ 

> i

=

Zi − bAX i. 

> 4:

Step 2: Sequential Identification  

> 5:

for each probe T ∈ T do  

> 6:

Attempt First-order ( m = 1 ):  

> 7:

Compute whitened Stein vector bν = bΩ

 1

> n

P 

> i

T (Yi)bZ′

> i



. 

> 8:

If signal strength ∥bν∥2 > τ 1, go to Step 3 with (m = 1 , bu = bν). 

> 9:

Attempt Second-order ( m = 2 ):  

> 10:

Compute Stein matrix bK = bΩ1/2

h 1

> n

P 

> i

T (Yi)( bZ′ 

> i

bZ′ 

> i⊤

− bΣ)

i bΩ1/2. 

> 11:

Compute leading eigenpair (λ, v). 

> 12:

If signal strength |λ| > τ 2, go to Step 3 with (m = 2 , bu = bΩ1/2v). 

> 13:

Fallback: Select (m∗, bu∗) corresponding to the maximum signal strength observed.  

> 14:

Step 3: Recovery  

> 15:

if High-Dim Regime then  

> 16:

bγ0 ← Trunc (bu) (Hard-thresholding for m = 1 ; Truncated Sparse PCA (Yuan and Zhang, 2013) output for m = 2 ).  

> 17:

else  

> 18:

bγ0 ← bu. 

> 19:

return Normalized estimator bγ = bγ0/∥bγ0∥2.In Algorithm 1, we first calculate the residual bZ′ 

> i

= Zi − bAX i, i = 1 , . . . , n , with the estimated 9conditional mean matrix bA and precision matrix bΩ = bΣ−1. Step 1 aims to facilitate the calculation of the Gaussian Stein kernel later. Then, we proceed with a sequential selection of the probe and order. In specific, for each probe T considered in Section 3.2, we calculate the signal strength by the first order whitened Stein vector, and select the order m = 1 when the signal is strong enough and m = 2 otherwise to remedy the potential identifiability issue under first order Stein-Encoder. The selected pair of probe and order is the one achieving the maximum signal strength. In the end, we estimate the Stein-Encoder by hard thresholding when the selected order is 1 or truncated PCA otherwise. We also provide a detailed algorithm in Section A of the Supplementary materials. Given the estimated Stein-Encoder bt = bγ⊤Z, we can improve prediction accuracy in multi-modal studies and interpret the impact of the modality of interest. First, we can use the scalar ˆt to interpret the impact of the modality of interest. In specific, rather than black-box encoders, ˆt can be interpreted as the conditional genetic risk score orthogonal to the clinical baseline in the METABRIC study. Second, we can feed (X, bt) into downstream DNN to improve prediction of Y in the multi-modal study. In specific, rather than compressing both clinical modality X and genetic modality Z,we first compute the Stein conditional encoded genetic risk scores bt = bγ⊤Z and then train a multi-layer perceptron hΘ(X, bt) to predict cancer-related outcomes Y in the METABRIC study (with an optional residual step in Eq. (3.24) of the Supplementary Materials to safeguard robustness). This “encoder + downstream” strategy decouples directional recovery from joint link estimation and substantially reduces the optimization burden, while directly fitting a joint training model might suffer from issues of identification, complex optimization and nuisance error as illustrated and discussed in Section B.1 of the Supplementary material. In summary, based on the Stein-Encoder, the two-stage prediction can substantially improve prediction accuracy of clinical outcomes because it mitigates the curse of dimensionality by filtering out high-dimensional genomic noise while preserving the interpretability and specific signal relevant to the outcome. In the two-stage prediction of the METABRIC study, we do not further compress X because it consists of clinical and CNA variables which include many numerical variables and are difficult to interpret using parametric structure. In addition, we can further augment this two-stage architecture with a residual learning safeguard that fits an additional network on (X, Z) to model the remaining signal beyond (X, bt), so that the combined predictor enjoys a provable safety guarantee when the genetic impact of the METABRIC study might not be linear. The precise formulation and risk bound is in Section C of the Supplementary Material. 

# 4 Theoretical Properties 

In this section we establish the main theoretical guarantees of the Stein-Encoder. We proceed in three parts. In Section 4.1 we analyze when simple probe choices fail to identify the index direction and develop a principled probe dictionary that guarantees identification under mild conditions. Sec-tion 4.2 then studies the statistical properties of the estimator: we show that the unified algorithm in Section 3.3 yields consistent estimators of γ in both low- and high-dimensional regimes. Finally, Section 4.3 quantifies how using the estimated Stein-Encoder as an input to downstream neural networks improves their generalization performance compared to naive models that operate directly on (X, Z).

4.1 Probe Design and Identification 

The estimation framework in Section 3.3 recovers γ from sample Stein moments provided that, at the population level, at least one Stein coefficient is non-zero: c1(T ; a)̸ = 0 or c2(T ; a)̸ = 0 for some probe 

T (·; a) in the dictionary. If we choose probes poorly, for example by using only the identity T (Y ) = Y

10 or the square T (Y ) = Y 2, these coefficients can vanish even when γ̸ = 0 because of the specific structure of the link f in the multi-modal single-index model Y = f (X, β⊤Z) + ε. We explicitly analyze these degeneracy phenomena—specifically symmetry (parity) failure and high-frequency orthogonality—and provide detailed mathematical constructions in Section C of the Supplementary Materials. These potential failures show that relying only on T1(Y ) = Y and T2(Y ) = Y 2 is not sufficient: we need a small dictionary of probes that (i) handles common linear and variance type relationships efficiently, (ii) has enough “spectral richness” in Y to interact with higher-order structure in the residual index, and (iii) remains bounded so that the corresponding Stein moments are statistically stable. Guided by these principles, we work with the following dictionary: 

T1(y) = y, T2(y) = y2, T3(y; a) = arctan( ay ), T4(y; a) = ay 2

1 + ay 2 , a > 0.

The first two probes capture linear and volatility-type effects. The bounded odd probe T3 has a Taylor expansion involving y3, y 5, . . . , and the bounded even probe T4 involves y4, y 6, . . . . By varying the scale parameter a, these probes generate a wide range of higher-order moment patterns in Y , while keeping all moments finite. In particular, T3 and T4 can interact with higher-order components of f (X, β⊤Z) that are orthogonal to the linear and quadratic structure picked up by 

T1 and T2.Formally, under the conditional Gaussian model for Z | X and mild regularity and non-degeneracy assumptions on the conditional moments of Y given the residual index (see Assumptions 2, 3 in Section C of the Supplementary Materials), one can show that this dictionary is rich enough to avoid the degeneracies described above. 

Theorem 4.1 (Unified identification with probe dictionary) . Suppose Assumption 3.1 holds and the Stein regularity and non-degeneracy conditions in Assumptions 2 and 3 in Section C of the Supplementary Materials are satisfied. Then, under the multi-modal single-index model (2) , there exists at least one probe T ∈ { T1, T 2, T 3(·; a), T 4(·; a)}, an order j ∈ { 1, 2}, and (for T3, T 4) a sufficiently small a > 0 such that the corresponding Stein coefficient is non-zero: cj (T ; a)̸ = 0 .Equivalently, β is identified via either the first order or the second order Stein-Encoder γ using a probe from this dictionary ( γ = ±β). 

Theorem 4.1 formalizes the role of the probe dictionary used by our sequential Stein-Encoder algorithm. It guarantees that, under mild assumptions on the single-index model Y = f (X, β⊤Z)+ ε,scanning over T ∈ { T1, T 2, T 3, T 4} and orders j ∈ { 1, 2} will always yield at least one non-degenerate Stein moment and hence an identifiable encoding direction. In practice, the algorithm in Section 3.3 implements this strategy by evaluating simple signal-strength criteria to select a probe order pair from the data. 

4.2 Consistency of the Stein-Encoder 

We establish the estimation consistency of the Stein-Encoder in two regimes. We begin with the 

low-dimensional regime , where p, q grow more slowly than n (p/n, q/n → 0). We utilize the estimators ( bA, bΣ, bΩ) from the low-dimensional version of Algorithm 2 in Section A of the Sup-plementary Materials (OLS and sample covariance). For convenience, define the aggregate rate 

rn := p(p + q)/n .11 Theorem 4.2 (Low-Dimensional Consistency) . Suppose Assumptions 3.1, 2 and 3 in Section C of the Supplementary Materials hold. Let (k, T ) be the order and probe used in Algorithm 1 and 

bγ(k) computed by Algorithm 1. Provided the identification condition holds (i.e., ck(T ; a)̸ = 0 ), there exists a sign l ∈ {− 1, 1} such that the estimator bγ(k) satisfies: 

bγ(k) − l γ 2 = Op(rn).

Theorem 4.2 confirms that in standard settings, bγ converges at the parametric rate adapted to the joint dimension. Next, we consider the high-dimensional regime , where p, q may exceed n.Here, we assume γ is sγ -sparse, A is sA-sparse, Ω is sΩ-sparse and utilize the high-dimensional version of Algorithm 1 (Lasso and Graphical Lasso) with truncation level proportional to sγ . The nuisance estimators ( bA, bΩ) are calculated by Algorithm 2 in Section A of the Supplementary Ma-terials, and they can be proved to satisfy the standard high-dimensional convergence rates detailed in Section C of the Supplementary Material. 

Theorem 4.3 (High-Dimensional Consistency) . Suppose Assumptions 3.1 and 2–4 in Section C of the Supplementary Materials hold. Let (k, T ) be the order and probe used with truncation level proportional to sγ in Algorithm 1 and bγ(k) computed by Algorithm 1. Provided the identification condition holds (i.e., ck(T ; a)̸ = 0 ), there exists a sign l ∈ {− 1, 1} such that the sparse estimator 

bγ(k) satisfies: 

bγ(k) − l γ 2 = Op

r sγ log qn +

r sA log( p ∨ q)

n +

r sΩ log qn



.

Comparing the two regimes, the Stein-Encoder exhibits a unified behavior: whether relying on the first-order mean signal or the second-order curvature signal, the estimation error is consis-tently governed by the sum of the complexity of estimating the target index (represented by rn

or psγ log q/n + psA log( p ∨ q)/n + psΩ log q/n ) and the cost of estimating the nuisance back-ground. The high-dimensional rate explicitly accounts for the sparsity of the genetic signal ( sγ )and the complexity of the clinical/background associations ( sA, s Ω), ensuring the method remains rigorous even when p, q ≫ n.

4.3 Benefits for Downstream Neural Networks 

A natural question is whether and by how much the Stein-Encoder’s dimensionality reduction translates into a provable improvement in downstream prediction. In this section, we answer this question affirmatively by comparing the excess prediction risk of a naive MLP fitted on (X, Z)

(Proposition 4.1) with that of an MLP fitted on the reduced input (X, bγ⊤Z) (Theorem 4.4), and show that the latter delivers a substantial risk reduction, particularly in the METABRIC study. In particular, here we consider the feedforward neural network as the regression model of the downstream prediction task, fΘ(X, Z) = Θ Lf L ΘL−1 · · · f 1 Θ0(X, Z) · · · , indexed by the pa-rameter space M = {Θ = (Θ L, . . . , Θ0), Θl ∈ Rpl+1 ×pl , l ∈ [L], p 0 = p + q, p L+1 = 1 }. The functions f l : Rpl → Rpl are 1-Lipschitz activation functions, p0 = p + q is the input dimension, 

pL+1 = 1 is the output dimension, L is the network depth, pmax = max l∈{ 0,...,L −1} pl+1 is the maximum width, and ptotal = PLl=0 pl+1 pl is the total number of parameters. Without loss of generality, similar to (Lederer, 2024) we focus our analysis on the constrained parameter spaces 

M1 = Θ ∈ M : max l∈{ 0,...,L −1} ∥Θl∥1,1 ≤ 1 where ∥Θl∥1,1 = Ppl+1 

> i=1

Ppl 

> k=1

|(Θ l)ik | and the derived theoretical results can be easily generalized to any parameter space with bounded l1-norm. The naive MLP estimator is defined as bΘ0 := arg min Θ∈M 1

> 1
> n

Pni=1 ∥Yi − fΘ(Xi, Zi)∥22 + λ0∥ΘL∥1,1,12 where the regularization term is proportional to the l1 norm of the last-layer parameters. This is to simplify the theoretical analysis, and the result can be extended to more common and complex reg-ularization terms like λ PLl=0 ∥Θl∥1,1 or λ QLl=0 ∥Θl∥1,1 using the same analysis technique (Lederer, 2024). The generalization bound of the neural network with parameter bΘ0 can be given as follows. 

Proposition 4.1. When Y −E[Y |X, Z] is subgaussian, E[Y |X, Z] is a 1-Lipschitz function of (X, Z)

and λ0 ≍ pp0L(log[2 np total ]) 3/n , with probability at least 1 − 2/n ,

E|f bΘ0 (X, Z) − E[Y |X, Z]|2 ≲ inf 

> Θ∈M 1

E|fΘ(X, Z) − E[Y |X, Z]|2

| {z }

> E1

+ v∞

r L(log[2 np total ]) 3

n ∥Θ∗L∥1,1 + v2

> ∞

L(log[2 np total ]) 3

n| {z }

> E2

, (6) 

where Θ∗ = (Θ ∗L, . . . , Θ∗0) = arg min Θ E|fΘ(X, Z) − E[Y |X, Z]|2 and v∞ =

q 1

> n

Pni=1 ∥Vi∥2

> ∞

,

Vi = ( X⊤ 

> i

, Z⊤ 

> i

)⊤.

To utilize the knowledge in bγ to improve the regression, we propose to set the covariates as 

(X, bγT Z) instead of the previous (X, Z). In particular, now the parameter space of the consid-ered neural network fΘ(X, bγT Z) = Θ Lf L ΘL−1 · · · f 1 Θ0(X, bγT Z) · · ·  becomes M′ = {Θ =(Θ L, . . . , Θ0), Θl ∈ Rp′ 

> l+1 ×p′
> l

, l ∈ [L], p ′ 

> 0

= p + 1 , p ′ 

> L+1

= 1 }. p′ 

> max

= max l∈{ 0,...,L −1} p′ 

> l+1

is the max-imum width, and p′ 

> total

= PLl=0 p′

> l+1

p′ 

> l

is the total number of parameters. For simplicity, we still consider the constrained parameter space M′ 

> 1

= Θ ∈ M ′ : max l∈{ 0,...,L −1} ∥Θl∥1,1 ≤ 1 and the neural network’s parameter with bγ’s knowledge transferred can be estimated as 

bΘbγ := arg min 

> Θ∈M ′
> 1

1

n

> n

X

> i=1

Yi − fΘ(Xi, bγT Zi) 22 + λ1∥ΘL∥1,1.

When the single index model is well specified, the generalization bound of f bΘbγ is given in Theorem 4.4 below. 

Theorem 4.4 (Generalization Bound under Correct Specification) . When (Y, X, Z) satisfies model 

(2) with the noise e := Y − E[Y |X, Z] being subgaussian, E[Y |X, Z] is 1-Lipschitz function of (X, Z)

and λ1 ≍ pp′

> 0

L(log[2 np ′

> total

]) 3/n , under Assumptions 1 to 3, we have 

E f bΘbγ (X, bγT Z) − E[Y |X, Z] 2

≲ inf 

> Θ∈M ′
> 1

E fΘ(X, γT Z) − E[Y |X, Z] 2

| {z }

> E′
> 1

+ v′∞

r L(log[2 np ′

> total

]) 3

n ∥Θ∗L 

> γ

∥1,1 + v′2

> ∞

L(log[2 np ′

> total

]) 3

n| {z }

> E′
> 2

+ LE[∥Z∥22]∥bγ − lγ∥22

| {z }

> E′
> 3

, (7) 

with probability at least 1 − 2/n , where Θ∗ 

> γ

:= arg min Θ∈M ′ 

> 1

E|fΘ(X, γT Z) − E[Y |X, Z]|2 and v′∞ =

q 1

> n

Pni=1 ∥(Xi, γT Zi)∥2

> ∞

.

The bound in Eq.(7) yields three concrete improvements over Proposition 4.1 when the single-index structure provides a good approximation. First, the Stein-Encoder oracle approximation 13 error E′ 

> 1

≤ E 1, where E1 is the oracle approximation error of the neural network class M1 for the true function in Proposition 4.1, since the reduced input class is contained in the full input class. Under β-Hölder smoothness (Yarotsky, 2017), the gap is exponential in dimension: E1 ≲ p−2β/ (p+q)max 

versus E′ 

> 1

≲ p−2β/ (p+1) max , where pmax is the maximum width defined at the beginning of this section. Second, the Stein-Encoder statistical error E′ 

> 2

≪ E 2, where E2 is the finite-sample statistical error of estimating Θ∗ in M1 under Proposition 4.1, since p′ 

> total

≪ ptotal when q is large, where p′ 

> total

and 

ptotal are the total numbers of parameters of the MLP in our proposed and naive methods. Third, the additional encoding cost E′ 

> 3

= L E[∥Z∥22] ∥bγ − lγ∥22 introduced by Stein-Encoder is negligible because Theorems 4.2–4.3 ensure ∥bγ − lγ∥22 converges at a near-parametric rate, faster than E′

> 2

.In particular, in the METABRIC analysis of Section 6, where p = 400 , q = 400 , and n ≈ 1,900 ,the Stein-Encoder reduces the effective input dimension from p + q = 800 to p + 1 = 401 , which substantially tightens both E′ 

> 1

and E′

> 2

, explaining the prediction improvement in Section 6. Similar theoretical results and improvement are provided and discussed when the optional residual safeguard in Eq. (3.24) is imposed in Section C.8.1 of the Supplementary Materials. In this paper, we focus on MLP because the METABRIC data are tabular. However, the under-lying dimension-reduction benefit is more general that any downstream learner whose generalization bound deteriorates with input dimension might benefit from replacing Z with bγ⊤Z. This is empiri-cally supported by the numerical results in Section B.4 of the Supplementary Materials, where the Stein representation also improves CNN1D and FTTransformer backbones. 

# 5 Numerical Experiments 

We consider a multi-modal single-index setting with a nuisance covariate X ∈ Rp, a high-dimensional feature vector Z ∈ Rq, and a scalar response Y . The covariate X is generated from a Gaussian AR(1) model X ∼ N (0 , ΣX ) with (Σ X )ij = ρ|i−j| 

> x

and ρx = 0 .5. We examine two configurations for Z. In Feature Setting I (independent), Z is generated independently of X as Z ∼ N (0 , ΣZ )

with (Σ Z )ij = ρ|i−j| 

> z

and ρz = 0 .3. In Feature Setting II (correlated), Z is conditionally linear in 

X: Z = AX + E. For the coefficient matrix A ∈ Rq×p, we consider two scenarios: in the low-dimensional setting, each entry of A is sampled independently from Unif( −0.5, 0.5) /√p. In the high-dimensional setting, A is sparse such that each row j has exactly sA = 10 non-zero entries (indexed by Sj which is randomly sampled) sampled independently from Unif( −0.5, 0.5) /√sA, while 

Ajk = 0 for k / ∈ Sj . Finally, we set E ∼ N (0 , ΣZ ), so that Z | X ∼ N (AX , ΣZ ) and X and Z are substantially correlated. The true index direction γ ∈ Rq is sparse, with five non-zero entries on the first few odd coordinates: 

βj = 1 j ∈ { 1, 3, 7} − 1 j ∈ { 5, 9}, γ = β/∥β∥2,

and the single index is t = γ⊤Z, with 1(·) being the indicator function. Conditional on (X, Z), the response is generated as 

Y = f (X, t ) + ε, ε ∼ N (0 , σ 2 

> ε

),

where σ2 

> ε

is chosen so that the signal-to-noise ratio SNR = Var( f )/σ 2 

> ε

equals 5. We consider three signal specifications: Model I: f (X, t ) = 2 sin( t) + 0 .3 t2 + 1 .3X1 − 1.1X2 + tX 4,

Model II: f (X, t ) = t2 exp( X1/2) + 0 .5( X22 − 1) + sin( X3),

Model III: f (X, t ) = 2t

1 + exp( −X1) + p|X2| | t + 2 | + 12 t3 + 12 X3.

14 Model I is a standard heterogeneous single-index model with polynomial and interaction terms. Model II is partially symmetric in t, so the main signal appears in curvature rather than the first derivative, a regime where naive first-order Stein methods are known to fail. Model III mimics a more complex, bio-inspired nonlinear relationship with both smooth and non-smooth dependence on (X, t ).For each model and each feature setting (independent vs. correlated), we consider two dimen-sional regimes: a low-dimensional regime (p, q ) = (20 , 20) and a high-dimensional regime (p, q ) = (400 , 100) . In every configuration we generate ntrain = 2000 training samples and ntest = 2000 test samples. To evaluate the benefit of the Stein-Encoder for downstream learning, we compare three multi-layer perceptron (MLP) based predictors: (1) a standard MLP taking the concatenated input [X, Z]

(Method A), (2) an MLP taking [X, ˆt] with ˆt = ˆ γ⊤Z learned by the proposed Stein-Encoder with residual safeguard in Eq. (3.24) of the Supplementary Material (Method B), and (3) an MLP taking 

[X, PC( Z)] , where PC( Z) is the first principal component of Z estimated on the training set (Method C). All networks share the same architecture: a fully connected feed-forward network with three hidden layers (128 units per layer), SiLU activation, batch normalization, dropout regularization, and an output layer for regression. This design ensures that differences in performance come from the representations of Z (raw vs. Stein-Encoder vs. PCA), not from differences in network capacity or training. Table 1 summarizes the results over 100 replications. By definition, γ is the normalized index direction and is identifiable only up to sign. We therefore assess recovery using the angle between bγ

and γ, together with the projection loss 1 − |⟨ bγ, γ⟩| . Accordingly, the reported “Angle(Proj)” gives the angle in degrees, followed by the projection loss in parentheses. MSE and R2 are computed on the test set for the three MLP-based predictors (Method A: [X, Z], Method B: [X, ˆγ⊤Z], Method C: 

[X, PC( Z)] ). Across all three models and both dimensional regimes, Method B (Stein-Encoder + MLP) consistently achieves the lowest test MSE and highest R2. In Model I, where the signal enters via the mean of Y and the first-order Stein coefficient is non-degenerate, the Stein-Encoder recovers 

γ with small angle error and yields clear predictive gains over the black-box MLP on [X, Z] (Method A), while the unsupervised PCA encoder (Method C) performs substantially worse. In Model II, where the dependence on t is locally symmetric and the signal is primarily of variance/curvature type, the sequential Stein procedure correctly switches to a second-order Stein moment and still pro-vides robust recovery of γ and superior prediction, whereas both the naive MLP and the PCA-based encoder struggle to capture this higher-order structure. In Model III, which combines complicated nonlinear effects of (X, t ), the residual Stein-Encoder continues to isolate the contribution of Z

conditionally on X and remains exceptionally stable under high dimensionality, while performance of the baselines deteriorates more noticeably as (p, q ) increase. Overall, the simulations confirm the main message of the paper: by using appropriately chosen Stein probes (first vs. second order) and residualization against X, the Stein-Encoder produces a low-dimensional, task-relevant summary of 

Z that improves downstream neural prediction without sacrificing interpretability. 

# 6 Real Data Analysis: The METABRIC Cohort 

6.1 Data Background and Preprocessing 

We apply our Stein-Encoder framework to the METABRIC (Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium) cohort data (Curtis et al., 2012), a comprehensive, multi-modal, large-scale, clinically annotated collection of primary breast cancer specimens from the UK and Canada. In METABRIC, gene expression profiles are known to be strongly associated with key clinical out-15 Table 1: Simulation results for all models. Each entry is averaged over 100 replications with 

ntrain = ntest = 2000 . Angle and projection loss summarize the accuracy of the estimated index direction ˆγ. MSE and R2 are computed on the test set. Model I pX pZ Angle(Proj) MSE A R2 

> A

MSE B R2 

> B

MSE C R2

> C

Indep 20 20 8.996(0.013) 1.238 0.759 1.101 0.785 3.935 0.233 Corr 20 20 7.745(0.010) 1.294 0.757 1.145 0.785 4.045 0.240 Indep 400 100 11.745(0.021) 2.987 0.413 2.242 0.560 5.086 0.002 Corr 400 100 11.570(0.021) 3.178 0.394 2.338 0.554 5.167 0.015 Model II Indep 20 20 11.429(0.021) 1.653 0.693 1.501 0.721 4.357 0.193 Corr 20 20 11.049(0.019) 1.875 0.695 1.703 0.724 5.102 0.171 Indep 400 100 20.662(0.108) 5.587 -0.031 3.534 0.354 5.647 -0.042 Corr 400 100 25.821(0.167) 5.872 -0.038 3.844 0.321 6.072 -0.074 Model III Indep 20 20 5.022(0.004) 3.588 0.742 3.002 0.784 14.746 -0.059 Corr 20 20 5.037(0.004) 4.159 0.745 3.515 0.784 15.906 0.022 Indep 400 100 6.718(0.007) 6.337 0.543 5.057 0.636 16.475 -0.189 Corr 400 100 6.913(0.007) 7.323 0.538 5.729 0.639 18.186 -0.148 comes, making the proposed supervised representation learning particularly well-motivated. In this work, we leverage METABRIC’s high-dimensional gene expression data (Illumina HT-12 v3 plat-form) alongside standard clinical covariates to demonstrate how Stein-Encoder can enhance predic-tive modeling in breast cancer. Specifically, we aim to show that by learning a low-dimensional, task-specific embedding of high-dimensional transcriptomic features ( Z) using the Stein-Encoder improves prediction accuracy when combined with standard clinical covariates ( X). 

Response ( Y ): We evaluate robustness across four diverse regression tasks: 

• Tumor Size , a direct morphological measure of disease burden. 

• Nottingham Prognostic Index (NPI) , a composite clinical score combining tumor size, grade, and lymph node status, widely used to stratify prognosis. 

• Lymph Node Status , an indicator of metastatic spread (positive/negative). 

• Age at Diagnosis , which is included as a biological proxy and often correlates with subtype distribution and treatment response patterns in breast cancer. Samples with missing responses were excluded, resulting in approximately n = 1900 observations. We preprocess and standardize the nuisance covariates X and the feature vector Z.

• Nuisance X (Clinical/CNA): Includes treatment status, tumor grade, ER status, and Copy Number Aberrations (CNA). Categorical variables were integer-encoded. Variables with missing rates > 30% were dropped. 

• Predictors Z (Gene Expression): High-dimensional gene-expression data from the Illu-mina HT-12 v3 platform. Following standard preprocessing protocols (Lupat et al., 2023), we analyze z-score transformed relative expression values normalized against diploid samples. We then prescreen the top 400 genes with the highest marginal variance for downstream analysis. 16 We adopt a 5-fold cross-validation scheme to evaluate the benefits of the Stein-Encoder for initializing downstream neural networks. We also use the same MLP backbone in the METABRIC analysis for consistency with the theory in Section 4.3. We compare the following architectures, all utilizing the same underlying 3-layer MLP backbone: 

Standard MLP: The end-to-end baseline receiving raw features [X, Z].

PCA + MLP: An unsupervised reduction baseline receiving [X, PCA k(Z)] .

Stein-Encoder + safeguarded MLP: We estimate bγStein using Algorithm 2 on the training fold and feed [X, bγTStein Z] to the network with residual safeguard in Eq. (3.24) in Supplementary Materials. To comprehensively evaluate predictive accuracy, particularly given the diverse scales and bio-logical interpretations of the chosen response variables, we report the mean squared error (MSE), mean absolute error (MAE) and the coefficient of determination ( R2) for each configuration. 

6.2 Results 

Table 2 summarizes the 5-fold cross-validation performance of the three competing approaches across four clinical prediction tasks in the METABRIC cohort. Overall, the proposed Stein-Encoder consistently achieves lower MSE and higher R2 compared to both the Standard MLP and the PCA baseline, indicating that a supervised, task-aware compression of transcriptomic features yields more informative low-dimensional representations for downstream prediction. Table 2: 5-Fold Cross-Validation Results on METABRIC. The proposed Stein-Encoder consistently achieves lower MSE and higher R2 compared to unsupervised and black-box baselines. 

Task Method MSE MAE R2

Tumor Size A 139.924 8.613 0.075 B 126.585 7.964 0.163 

C 123.819 8.036 0.182 NPI Score A 0.750 0.648 0.427 B 0.621 0.569 0.515 

C 0.617 0.567 0.529 Lymph Nodes A 14.558 2.082 0.125 B 13.850 2.049 0.168 

C 13.203 2.084 0.206 Age A 66.412 6.489 0.606 B 69.058 6.636 0.590 

C 63.975 6.298 0.620 

For the challenging Tumor Size prediction task, which is known to exhibit substantial biological and measurement noise, the Standard MLP (Method A) trained directly on [X, Z] achieves only modest explanatory power ( R2 ≈ 0.075 ). The PCA baseline (Method B), which projects the high-dimensional Z onto a low-dimensional unsupervised subspace before feeding it into the network, improves performance to R2 ≈ 0.163 . In contrast, the Stein-Encoder (Method C) further reduces MSE from 139.924 (Standard MLP) and 126.585 (PCA) to 123.819, and increases R2 to approxi-mately 0.182. This suggests that the supervised index bγ⊤

> Stein

Z captures a more task-relevant genetic component of tumor size than the variance-maximizing directions identified by PCA. A similar pattern is observed for the NPI Score , an integrated prognostic index. The Standard MLP baseline achieves an R2 of roughly 0.427, while PCA improves this to 0.525. The Stein-Encoder 17 attains the best overall performance with the lowest MSE (0.617) and the highest R2 (0.529), reflecting that supervised shrinkage towards the Stein direction can extract a more informative one-dimensional risk score than unsupervised projections, even when signal-to-noise ratio is moderate. For the Lymph Nodes Positive outcome, all three methods achieve relatively modest yet non-trivial predictive performance. Here, PCA already yields a noticeable gain over the black-box baseline ( R2 from 0.125 to 0.168), indicating that unsupervised dimensionality reduction mitigates overfitting in this high-dimensional setting. Nevertheless, the Stein-Encoder continues to provide incremental improvements (MSE 13.203 vs. 13.850 for PCA, R2 0.206 vs. 0.168), underscoring the benefit of tailoring the representation to the specific regression task. Finally, for Age at Diagnosis , which is a smoother and more strongly structured outcome, all methods achieve higher R2 values compared to the other tasks. The Standard MLP reaches 

R2 ≈ 0.606 , PCA marginally reduces this to 0.590 (although slightly increasing MSE), while the Stein-Encoder substantially lowers MSE to 63.975 and increases R2 to approximately 0.620. This highlights that even for relatively “easy” tasks with higher signal-to-noise ratios, incorporating a supervised, low-dimensional genetic score can still significantly enhance predictive accuracy. To further visualize the learned genetic representations, we examine the relationship between the response Y and two scalar summaries of the high-dimensional gene expression: the supervised Stein-Encoder score t = bγ⊤

> Stein

Z and the first principal component PC1 (Z) from PCA, where bγStein = bγ

was obtained using the hard-thresholding operator with a sparsity level set s = 20 . For illustration, we focus on the two tasks where the Stein-Encoder achieves the largest gains over PCA: Tumor Size 

and Age at Diagnosis . Figure 2 displays the corresponding scatter plots for these two responses. Figures for the other two responses, additional normality and single-index structural diagnostics by histogram, QQ plot and residual plot, and the results under alternative downstream architectures (CNN1D and FTTransformer) are reported in Section B.5 of the Supplementary Materials. For Tumor Size (left panel of Figure 2), plotting Y against the Stein-Encoder score reveals a clear, structured monotone trend, indicating that a one-dimensional supervised genetic index explains a substantial portion of the variability in tumor size. In contrast, the scatter of tumor size against the first PCA component appears much more diffuse, with no obvious functional relationship. This illustrates that directions of maximum variance in the gene expression space (PCA) do not necessarily align with directions that are most predictive for the clinical endpoint of interest. A similar phenomenon is observed for Age at Diagnosis (right panel of Figure 2). The plot of age versus the Stein-Encoder score exhibits a pronounced and coherent dependence pattern, suggesting that the supervised genetic index successfully captures biologically meaningful age-related transcrip-tomic variation. By comparison, the relationship between age and the first principal component of Z is much weaker and more scattered, again highlighting the limitations of purely unsupervised dimensionality reduction for predictive modeling. Taken together, these visualizations provide di-rect geometric evidence that the Stein-Encoder is extracting task-specific directions in the gene expression space that are not aligned with principal axes of variance but are substantially more informative for prediction. Here, we illustrate that the Stein-Encoder not only improves predictive accuracy but also yields a markedly more interpretable genetic index than PCA. For each of the four prognostic responses (tumor size, lymph nodes examined positive, NPI, and age at diagnosis), the top Stein-Encoder coefficients concentrate on genes that form well-characterized biological modules in breast cancer (Table 3), whereas the PCA loadings are dominated by a single, unsupervised proliferation axis that is essentially the same across tasks. For tumor size and lymph node involvement, the Stein-Encoder upweights core mitotic, cell-cycle, and structure-related genes such as MELK, COL18A1, TNFRSF17, CD1C, TROAP, FOXM1, DLGAP5, CKAP2L, ZWINT, PLK1, CENPA, and CDC20. Many of these (e.g., CDC20, FOXM1, 18 (a) Tumor Size: response vs. Stein-Encoder score (bγ⊤Z) and vs. first PCA component of Z. 

> (b) Age at Diagnosis: response vs. Stein-Encoder score and vs. first PCA component.

Figure 2: Scatter plots of METABRIC responses versus (i) the supervised Stein-Encoder genetic score t = bγ⊤Z and (ii) the first principal component of Z.CENPA, CKAP2L, PLK1) belong to or are co-regulated with the mitotic network associated with chromosome 5q deletions and basal-like tumors described by (Curtis et al., 2012), which is linked to genomic instability and aggressive disease. That our Stein directions recover highly relevant proliferation and structural programs when predicting tumor size and lymph node involvement is exactly what one would expect if they are capturing residual proliferative aggressiveness beyond standard clinical and CNA covariates. In contrast, for NPI and age at diagnosis, the Stein-Encoder combines proliferation genes (e.g., CENPE, CDCA5, CCNB2, PTTG1, MCM2) with a rich set of immune and B/T-cell–associated genes, including HLA-DOB, TNFRSF13B, CD52, CD1C, CD48, CD69, IGJ, CD38, AMICA1, RAC-GAP1, and FOXP1-IT1 (a long non-coding RNA locus related to the FOXP1 tumor suppressor, as highlighted by (Pereira et al., 2016)). These are canonical markers of B-cell receptor signaling and cytotoxic lymphocytes. (Curtis et al., 2012) identified a CNA-devoid subgroup with strong adaptive immune signatures and lymphocytic infiltration, and (Pereira et al., 2016) highlighted FOXP1 as a candidate tumor suppressor whose low expression has been linked to poor outcomes. The fact that our Stein directions for NPI and age are enriched for similar B/T-cell modules is therefore consistent with the “proliferation vs. immune” prognostic axes reported in METABRIC. Note that in our implementation, the Stein-Encoder operates on gene expression residuals after adjusting for clinical factors and CNAs, so the selected genes reflect transcriptomic variation not already explained by those covariates. By comparison, the genes with the largest absolute loadings on the first PCA component (e.g., CDCA5, AURKB, UBE2C, CCNB2, CDC20, TPX2, MELK, CEP55, KIF20A, HJURP, PTTG1, CKAP2L, EXO1, BUB1, CDC45, CENPE, NCAPG, CENPA, AURKA, FOXM1) form a generic mitotic module very similar to the one described by (Curtis et al., 2012), and this same proliferation component is used for all four responses. This illustrates the key difference: PCA, being unsupervised, always recovers the dominant variance direction (pro-liferation), whereas the Stein-Encoder produces response-specific directions that align with known, outcome-relevant pathways (proliferation and immune infiltration) and are thus more informative 19 for biological interpretation. In summary, adopting the Stein-Encoder in the METABRIC study, we improve prediction accu-racy while producing response-specific genetic scores with clear biological meaning. The improved prediction accuracy supports more accurate diagnosis and timely personalized treatment for breast cancer patients. The interpretable response-specific score helps better understand the mechanism between genes and breast cancers, and identifies significant genes for different breast cancer-related outcomes with clear biological interpretation. Table 3: Top 20 genes selected by the Stein-Encoder for each prognostic response and top 20 genes by PCA Response Stein-Encoder selected genes Tumor size AMICA1, CD52, MELK, COL18A1, ANKRD50, TNFRSF17, PRF1, CD1C, KIAA0889, KIF4A, TROAP, DNAJC13, CD79B, FOXM1, DLGAP5, CKAP2L, PMEPA1, ADAM7, IFNG, C20orf11 Lymph nodes TROAP, ZWINT, SH2D1A, CAMK1G, ZBED2, DDX23, CKAP2L, PLK1, ORAOV1, examined DPM3, RASGRP2, KIF23, SENP5, CENPA, ARRDC5, TLR10, TNFRSF17, COL18A1, positive CDC20, HLA-DOB Nottingham ZBED2, CENPE, BANK1, KIFC1, CDCA5, HLA-DOB, TNFRSF13B, POLQ, RASGRP2, Prognostic PTGER3, CD52, CD1C, CKAP2L, CD48, PLK1, JAK2, JAG2, SIK1, SUSD3, BARD1 Index (NPI) Age at CD48, MAP4K1, PYHIN1, CCNB2, PTTG1, PRC1, CD69, IGJ, MCM2, IFNG, CD38, diagnosis ASPM, MELK, RACGAP1, PNOC, FOXP1-IT1, KIF23, AMICA1, ATAD2, NCAPG PCA selected genes (PC1 loadings with the largest absolute coefficients) CDCA5, AURKB, UBE2C, CCNB2, CDC20, TPX2, MELK, CEP55, KIF20A, HJURP, PTTG1, CKAP2L, EXO1, BUB1, CDC45, CENPE, NCAPG, CENPA, AURKA, FOXM1 

# 7 Significance Statement 

The Stein-Encoder is a white-box and supervised method to extract the impact of the modality of interest, while adjusting for the others. Compared with the usual unsupervised or black-box method, the Stein-Encoder makes the prediction more accurate and the interpretation more transparent. In particular, applying the Stein-Encoder pipeline to the METABRIC study, we improve prediction accuracy of the cancer-related outcome and reveal outcome-specific biological patterns, including immune-related signals, supporting more interpretable precision medicine for breast cancer patients. 

# Acknowledgements 

Jiasheng Shi and Xinzhou Guo are co-corresponding authors. 

# References 

Tadas Baltrušaitis, Chaitanya Ahuja, and Louis-Philippe Morency. Multimodal machine learning: A survey and taxonomy. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 41(2): 423–443, 2018. 20 Victor Chernozhukov, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Christian Hansen, Whit-ney Newey, and James Robins. Double/debiased machine learning for treatment and structural parameters, 2018. Francesca Chiaromonte, R Dennis Cook, and Bing Li. Sufficient dimension reduction in regressions with categorical predictors. Annals of Statistics , pages 475–497, 2002. Travers Ching, Daniel S Himmelstein, Brett K Beaulieu-Jones, Alexandr A Kalinin, Brian T Do, Gregory P Way, Enrico Ferrero, Paul-Michael Agapow, Michael Zietz, Michael M Hoffman, et al. Opportunities and obstacles for deep learning in biology and medicine. Journal of the royal society interface , 15(141):20170387, 2018. R Dennis Cook and Sanford Weisberg. Sliced inverse regression for dimension reduction: Comment. 

Journal of the American Statistical Association , 86(414):328–332, 1991. Christina Curtis, Sohrab P Shah, Suet-Feung Chin, Gulisa Turashvili, Oscar M Rueda, Mark J Dunning, Doug Speed, Andy G Lynch, Shamith Samarajiwa, Yinyin Yuan, et al. The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast tumours reveals novel subgroups. Nature , 486 (7403):346–352, 2012. Marcus H Galea, Roger W Blamey, Christopher E Elston, and Ian O Ellis. The nottingham prog-nostic index in primary breast cancer. Breast cancer research and treatment , 22(3):207–219, 1992. Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Deep learning . MIT press Cambridge, 2016. Yehudit Hasin, Marcus Seldin, and Aldons Lusis. Multi-omics approaches to disease. Genome biology , 18(1):83, 2017. John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger, Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with alphafold. nature , 596(7873):583–589, 2021. Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013. Vessela N Kristensen, Ole Christian Lingjærde, Hege G Russnes, Hans Kristian M Vollan, Arnoldo Frigessi, and Anne-Lise Børresen-Dale. Principles and methods of integrative genomic analyses in cancer. Nature Reviews Cancer , 14(5):299–313, 2014. Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. nature , 521(7553):436–444, 2015. Johannes Lederer. Statistical guarantees for sparse deep learning. AStA Advances in Statistical Analysis , 108(2):231–258, 2024. Ker-Chau Li. Sliced inverse regression for dimension reduction. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 86(414):316–327, 1991. Richard Lupat, Rashindrie Perera, Sherene Loi, and Jason Li. Moanna: multi-omics autoencoder-based neural network algorithm for predicting breast cancer subtypes. Ieee Access , 11:10912– 10924, 2023. Amil Merchant, Simon Batzner, Samuel S Schoenholz, Muratahan Aykol, Gowoon Cheon, and Ekin Dogus Cubuk. Scaling deep learning for materials discovery. Nature , 624(7990):80–85, 2023. 21 Ann H Partridge, Melissa E Hughes, Erica T Warner, Rebecca A Ottesen, Yu-Ning Wong, Stephen B Edge, Richard L Theriault, Douglas W Blayney, Joyce C Niland, Eric P Winer, et al. Subtype-dependent relationship between young age at diagnosis and breast cancer survival. Journal of Clinical Oncology , 34(27):3308–3314, 2016. Bernard Pereira, Suet-Feung Chin, Oscar M Rueda, Hans-Kristian Moen Vollan, Elena Provenzano, Helen A Bardwell, Michelle Pugh, Linda Jones, Roslin Russell, Stephen-John Sammut, et al. The somatic mutation profiles of 2,433 breast cancers refine their genomic and transcriptomic landscapes. Nature communications , 7(1):11479, 2016. Peter M Robinson. Root-n-consistent semiparametric regression. Econometrica: journal of the Econometric Society , pages 931–954, 1988. Cynthia Rudin. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead. Nature machine intelligence , 1(5):206–215, 2019. Charles M Stein. Estimation of the mean of a multivariate normal distribution. The annals of Statistics , pages 1135–1151, 1981. Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Bengio, and Pierre-Antoine Manzagol. Extracting and composing robust features with denoising autoencoders. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning , pages 1096–1103, 2008. Peter M Visscher, Naomi R Wray, Qian Zhang, Pamela Sklar, Mark I McCarthy, Matthew A Brown, and Jian Yang. 10 years of gwas discovery: biology, function, and translation. The American Journal of Human Genetics , 101(1):5–22, 2017. Michael Wainberg, Daniele Merico, Andrew Delong, and Brendan J Frey. Deep learning in biomedicine. Nature biotechnology , 36(9):829–838, 2018. Dmitry Yarotsky. Error bounds for approximations with deep relu networks. Neural networks , 94: 103–114, 2017. Xiao-Tong Yuan and Tong Zhang. Truncated power method for sparse eigenvalue problems. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 14(1):899–925, 2013. 22