Title: AttnGen: Attention-Guided Saliency Learning for Interpretable Genomic Sequence Classification

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.14073v1

Published Time: Fri, 15 May 2026 00:18:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# AttnGen: Attention-Guided Saliency Learning for Interpretable Genomic Sequence Classification 

Rayhaneh Shabani Nia 

University of California, Davis 

California, USA rshabaninia@ucdavis.edu 

Ali Karkehabadi 

University of California, Davis 

California, USA akarkehabadi@ucdavis.edu 

Abstract —Deep neural networks have achieved great perfor-mance in genomic sequences; however, still is a mystery to relate their predictions to biologically meaningful patterns. In this work, we present AttnGen, an attention-guided training frame-work that embeds interpretability directly into the optimization process. AttnGen computes nucleotide-level importance through a specific attention mechanism. It then uses these scores to progressively suppress low-contribution positions during training. This encourages the model to concentrate its predictions on a compact set of informative regions and prevents distributing importance across noisy sequence elements. We evaluate AttnGen on the standardized demo human or worm benchmark, consist-ing of binary classification over 200-nucleotide sequences. With moderate masking, AttnGen achieves a validation accuracy of 96.73%, outperforming a conventional CNN baseline (95.83%) while also exhibiting faster convergence and improved training stability. To examine whether the learned importance scores reflect functionally relevant signal, we perform perturbation-based analysis by removing high-saliency nucleotides. This results in a substantial accuracy drop—from 96.9% to near chance level on a 3,000-sequence evaluation set—indicating that predictions depend on a relatively small subset of positions. Our conducted analysis shows that masking 10–20% of po-sitions yields the most favorable trade-off between predictive performance and interpretability. These results indicate that attention-guided masking not only improves classification perfor-mance but also reshapes how models distribute importance across sequence positions. While this study targets the short genomic sequences, the proposed approach could be extend interpretable training strategies to more complex sequence modeling settings. 

Index Terms —Genomic sequence classification, progressive masking, interpretability, attention mechanism 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

In genomic sequence modeling, predictive accuracy alone is often insufficient. Model outputs are frequently used to guide downstream biological interpretation, such as identi-fying regulatory motifs or prioritizing candidate regions for experimental validation. Models that perform well but offer no insight into their decision process are difficult to trust. Early approaches such as position weight matrices (PWMs) and k-mer–based models provided a structured way to represent local sequence preferences [1]. However, these methods assume limited interaction structure and struggle when regulatory signals depend on broader context or long-range dependen-cies. Deep learning models address part of this limitation by learning representations directly from raw sequence data. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs), in particular, have shown strong performance across tasks such as transcription-factor binding prediction and enhancer detection [2], [3]. In several cases, these models rediscover known biological motifs without explicit supervision, indicating that they cap-ture meaningful structure in the data. Recent work in self-supervised learning has explored alignment-based objectives to improve representation quality without requiring large labeled datasets. In particular, alignment learning has been applied in medical image segmentation to enforce consistency across different view and learn stable feature correspondences [4]. This perspective is relevant to genomic sequence modeling, where only a subset of positions contributes meaningfully to prediction. Post hoc explanation methods attempt to bridge this gap. Saliency maps [5], integrated gradients [6], DeepLIFT [7], and attention-based approaches [8] are commonly used to assign importance scores to individual nucleotides. However, these methods have limitations. For example, prior work has shown that certain saliency maps remain largely unchanged even when model parameters are randomized [9], raising concerns about whether they reflect true model behavior. If interpretability is introduced only after training, it does not affect how model forms its decisions. An alternative is to incorporate interpretability during training. Prior work has explored this idea through saliency-guided masking and con-sistency constraints [10], [11], [12], [16]. In a related direction, Unified Gravity Loss [14] improves robustness by shaping the feature space during training. Despite its relevance, this di-rection remains relatively underexplored in genomic sequence modeling. AttnGen follows this perspective by integrating a lightweight attention mechanism that estimates nucleotide importance during the forward pass. Positions identified as less informative are progressively masked, encouraging the model to focus on a smaller set of discriminative regions while preserving necessary context. We evaluate this approach on the standardized 

demo_human_or_worm dataset from the Genomic Benchmarks collection [13]. Our goal is to study whether masking low-importance positions preserves predictive performance and whether the learned importance scores are aligned with the models predictions. To study this, we perform gradient based ablation by removing high and low saliency nucleotides and measuring the resulting change in classification accuracy. 

> arXiv:2605.14073v1 [cs.LG] 13 May 2026

II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Deep Learning for Genomic Sequence Modeling 

Unlike images or natural language, genomic sequences do not exhibit clear spatial or semantic segmentation, making hand-crafted feature design both domain intensive and brittle. Deep learning addresses this challenge by enabling models to learn representations directly from raw DNA sequences with-out relying on predefined features. Early work demonstrated that convolutional neural networks (CNNs) can capture regu-latory patterns from sequence data alone. Alipanahi et al. [15] showed that CNNs could infer DNA- and RNA binding protein specificities without predefined motif templates, providing one of the first clear demonstrations of end-to-end learning in this domain. Around the same time, DeepSEA [17] introduced a multi task convolutional framework capable of predicting chromatin effects at single nucleotide resolution, highlighting how small sequence variations can lead to measurable reg-ulatory changes. As architectures became more expressive, attention shifted toward modeling interactions beyond local receptive fields. Regulatory elements often involve motifs separated by tens or even hundreds of nucleotides, requiring models to capture long-range dependencies. DanQ [18] ad-dressed this limitation by combining convolutional layers with bidirectional LSTMs, enabling motif level representations to interact across longer sequence spans. More recent work has incorporated attention mechanisms to model distal enhancer promoter interactions that may span kilobases [8]. Collec-tively, these approaches reflect a transition from local motif detection toward modeling distributed and context depen-dent regulatory structure. Despite these advances, evaluating progress in genomic modeling remains challenging. Reported performance improvements often depend on preprocessing pipelines, filtering strategies, or dataset splits. Even minor implementation choices can lead to nontrivial differences in results, making it difficult to attribute gains to model de-sign alone. The introduction of Genomic Benchmarks [13] addressed part of this issue by providing a curated collec-tion of datasets with standardized preprocessing and baseline implementations. However, while such benchmarks improve evaluation consistency, they do not fully resolve how different training strategies—particularly those targeting interpretability behave under controlled conditions. In this work, we adopt the demo_human_or_worm 

dataset from the Genomic Benchmarks collection. The dataset contains 100,000 DNA sequences of length 200 and defines a balanced binary classification task. Its controlled setup allows us to study the effects of saliency-guided training without confounding variability introduced by custom data processing pipelines. 

B. Interpretability and Saliency-Guided Training 

Most interpretability methods operate after model training. Gradient-based saliency maps [5] estimate input importance through local sensitivity, while Integrated Gradients [6] and Grad-CAM [19] provide refinements intended to improve attribution quality. However, these approaches have known limitations: gradient-based explanations can be noisy and sen-sitive to small perturbations, while perturbation-based methods are often computationally expensive. In genomic applications, such instability is particularly problematic, as small changes in importance scores can directly affect biological interpretation. More fundamentally, prior work has shown that certain saliency methods may produce visually plausible explanation even when model parameters are randomized [9], raising concerns about whether these explanations reflect true model behavior or merely plausible artifacts. At the same time, integrating gradient-based saliency into the training loop is not straight forward. Computing saliency at each iteration re-quires additional backward passes and can introduce instability during optimization [20]. This makes it difficult to directly incorporate attribution signals into the learning process. An alternative is to estimate importance scores in the forward pass. An attention mechanism provides such a pathway, it produces differentiable importance weights without requiring repeated gradient computations, making it more suitable for integration into the training objective. Saliency-Guided Training (SGT) [11] builds on this idea by masking low importance features and enforcing consistency between original and masked pre-dictions using a KL divergence regularizer. This approach encourages models to rely less on noisy or incidental features and more on stable, predictive structure. We adapt this principle to genomic sequence classification in AttnGen. Instead of relying on gradient-based saliency during training, we use a lightweight attention mechanism to estimate per nucleotide importance in the forward pass. Progressive masking and KL-based consistency are retained, but reformulated for sequence data, where masking individual nucleotides introduces different structural constraint compared to masking pixels in images. 

C. Research Gaps and Our Contributions 

Although genomic deep learning architectures have become increasingly sophisticated, relatively little work has examined how interpretability constraints influence sequence based op-timization. Existing saliency-guided approaches have largely been developed in vision settings, where masking operates over continuous pixel intensities. In contrast, genomic se-quences are discrete and symbolic, and masking individual nucleotides can alter both local context and downstream rep-resentation in nontrivial ways. As a result, it remains unclear whether saliency guided training strategies transfer effectively to genomic sequence modeling, particularly under standardized evaluation setting. In this work, we investigate this question through AttnGen, an attention-guided saliency learning framework. By combining forward-pass importance estimation with structured masking and consistency constraints, we examine whether interpretabil-ity can be incorporated into the training process in a way that directly shapes nucleotide-level importance and the resulting biological interpretations. III. P ROBLEM STATEMENT 

A. Task Definition 

Let D = {(xi, y i)}Ni=1 denote a genomic dataset in which each xi ∈ ΣL is a DNA sequence of length L over the nucleotide alphabet Σ = {A, T, G, C }, and yi ∈ {0, 1}

indicates the class label ( human versus C. elegans ). Our goal is to learn a classifier fθ : Σ L → R2 that performs well on unseen sequences while also revealing which positions in the sequence contribute most strongly to its decisions. In addi-tion to predictive accuracy, we examine whether the model’s outputs are supported by biologically meaningful patterns rather than superficial correlations. Many existing approaches prioritize predictive performance as the primary optimization target. Although some incorporate domain knowledge or motif constraints, standard end to end neural training typically does not distinguish between highly informative positions and those that contribute little signal. In practice, genomic sequences are not uniformly informative. Certain regions contain regulatory motif or conserved subsequences, whereas others introduce redundancy or noise. A central question therefore emerges: can the training process itself encourage the model to concentrate on discriminative positions, instead of relying on diffuse or dataset specific cues? 

B. Challenges and Research Questions 

Convolutional sequence models provide strong classifica-tion accuracy, yet they offer limited transparency regarding which nucleotides drive predictions. Attribution techniques can estimate importance score, but these are usually computed after training and do not alter how representations are formed. This separation between learning and explanation creates a mismatch: the model may rely on feature that appear weak or unstable under post-hoc analysis, making biological inter-pretation uncertain. Another difficulty arises from positional and compositional biases present in many genomic datasets. Models may exploit such biases to achieve high training accuracy without learning relationships that generalize beyond the dataset at hand. Additionally, incorporating gradient-based saliency directly into optimization introduces computational overhead and can amplify instability during backpropagation [20]. These considerations lead us to three guiding ques-tions. We first examine whether attention mechanisms can approximate gradient derived saliency in a way that remains stable during training. We then study how masking sequence positions based on learned importance influences model focus and predictive behavior. Finally, we investigate how different masking intensities affect the balance between accuracy, inter-pretability, and robustness in nucleotide-level classification. 

C. Approach Overview 

We propose AttnGen , an attention-guided saliency learn-ing framework that incorporates interpretability constraints into the optimization process. Instead of computing gradient based attribution at every iteration—which typically requires additional backward passes—AttnGen introduces a lightweight attention module that produces per-nucleotide importance scores during the forward computation. This design avoids repeated gradient evaluations and reduces the computational cost relative to gradient-based saliency integration. The model then applies progressive masking to positions assignd low importance. Rather than enforcing hard sparsity, this masking encourages the network to rely more consis-tently on discriminative regions of the sequence. To maintain stable predictions, a Kullback–Leibler divergence term aligns the output distributions of original and masked input. This regularization penalizes large predictive shifts when low-importance positions are removed, thereby reinforcing the rele-vance of retained nucleotides. Our focus is to analyze how this attention-driven masking strategy shapes model behavior under controlled experimental conditions and whether it improves the alignment between predictive performance and identifiable sequence regions. IV. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. Model Architecture 

The base classifier fθ in AttnGen is a 1D convolutional network designed for genomic sequence inputs. An embed-ding layer first maps discrete nucleotide tokens into 128-dimensional continuous vectors. Three convolutional blocks are then applied, each consisting of a 1D convolution (ker-nel size 8), batch normalization, ReLU activation, and max pooling (stride 2). The kernel size of 8 was selected to capture short sequence motifs spanning approximately 6–8 nucleotides, which aligns with the typical length of many regulatory elements reported in prior genomic studies. The use of three convolutional stages allows the model to progressively expand its receptive field while maintaining computational efficiency. Channel dimen-sionality is reduced (128 → 32 → 16 → 4) to limit model capacity and reduce overfitting on short sequences. After flattening, two fully connected layers with dropout (p=0 .3) produce binary class logits. 

B. Attention-Based Saliency Computation 

Standard saliency estimation relies on gradient computation 

∇xfθ (x) to measure feature importance [5]. While effective for post-hoc analysis, computing gradients for saliency during training requires additional backward passes and can introduce instability into the optimization process. To avoid this overhead, AttnGen estimates importance directly in the forward pass using a lightweight attention mechanism. Given the embedding tensor E(x) ∈ RB×L×d for a batch of sequences ( B: batch size, L = 200 , d = 128 ), we compute position-wise scores by averaging across the feature dimension: 

sb,i (x) = 1

d

> d

X

> j=1

Eb,i,j (x), s(x) ∈ RB×L. (1) The normalized importance weights are then obtained via a softmax operation along the sequence dimension: 

Ab,i (x) = exp  sb,i (x)PLi′=1 exp  sb,i ′ (x) , A(x) ∈ RB×L. (2) We use mean aggregation rather than max pooling to reduce sensitivity to individual embedding dimensions, which may be noisy or poorly calibrated during early training. This yields a more stable estimate of position-wise importance. The resulting weights Ab,i (x) are used to rank nucleotide positions for subsequent masking. 

C. Progressive Masking Strategy 

During training, AttnGen uses the attention weights to sup-press low-importance positions. For a masking ratio α ∈ [0 , 1] ,the number of masked positions is: 

k = ⌊αL ⌋ . (3) The indices corresponding to the k least salient positions are defined as: 

Imask (x) = arg min I⊂{ 1,...,L }|I| =k

X

> i∈I

Ab,i (x), (4) i.e., the set of k positions with the smallest importance scores. The masked input ˜x is constructed by replacing po-sitions in Imask (x) with a padding token (index 0). This oper-ation is applied independently to each sequence in the batch. This masking strategy introduces a controlled perturbation that forces the model to redistribute attention toward more infor-mative regions. We consider four masking regimes: baseline (0%), moderate (10–25%), high (50%), and extreme (75%). These regimes span the range from minimal perturbation to near-complete information removal, with finer resolution in the moderate range where the accuracy–interpretability trade-off is most sensitive. 

D. Saliency-Guided Loss Function 

The AttnGen objective combines standard classification loss with a consistency constraint: 

Ltotal = LCE 

 fθ (x), y  + λ DKL 

 fθ (x) ∥ fθ (˜ x),

where LCE is the cross-entropy loss and DKL measures diver-gence between prediction distributions: 

DKL 

 fθ (x) ∥ fθ (˜ x) =

> C

X

> c=1

P (c|x) log P (c|x)

P (c|˜x) .

The KL term penalizes large prediction shifts when low-importance positions are removed, encouraging the model to rely on features that remain stable under masking. The regularization weight λ=0 .1 controls the trade-off between predictive accuracy and consistency, and was selected based on a small grid search over {0.01 , 0.1, 0.5} on the validation set. For the baseline setting ( α=0 ), λ=0 reduces the objective to standard cross-entropy training. Algorithm 1 summarizes the overall training procedure, replacing gradient-based saliency computation in [11] with forward-pass attention estimation. 

Algorithm 1 AttnGen                                          

> Input: Training samples X, labels y, masking ratio α, learning rate η, KL weight λ, epochs N
> for epoch = 1 to Ndo for each mini-batch (x, y )do # Compute position-wise importance
> sb,i =1
> d
> P
> jEb,i,j ,Ab,i =exp( sb,i )
> P
> i′exp( sb,i ′)
> # Select low-importance positions
> k=⌊αL ⌋Imask = arg min |I| =k
> P
> i∈I Ab,i
> Construct masked input
> ex= Mask( x,Imask )
> # Compute training objective
> L=LCE +λDKL
> # update
> θ←θ−η∇θL
> end end

E. Training Configuration 

All models are trained using the Adam optimizer (learning rate η=0 .001 ), batch size 64, and weight decay 10 −4. These hyperparameters follow standard configurations for short-sequence classification tasks and were found to provide stable convergence in preliminary experiments. Early stopping with patience 10 (based on validation accu-racy) is applied to balance training time and overfitting risk. The KL weight λ=0 .1 is used for all masking levels except the baseline ( α=0 ). We use a fixed random seed (42), mini-batch shuffling, and gradient clipping (max-norm 1.0) to stabilize optimization. 

F. Gradient-Based Importance Validation 

To evaluate whether attention based importance aligns with gradient sensitivity, we perform post-hoc gradient analysis. For a trained model fθ , we sample N =3000 sequences and compute importance scores: 

Ii = ∂f θ (x)

∂E(x)i 2

,

where E(x)i denotes the embedding at position i.We then progressively mask positions in decreasing order of Ii and measure classification accuracy as a function of the number of masked nucleotides m. A steeper accuracy drop under high-importance masking—compared to random or low-importance baselines—indicates that the model relies on a structured rather than diffuse set of positio V. R ESULTS 

We evaluate AttnGen on the demo_human_or_worm 

benchmark [13] under multiple masking configurations (10%, 20%, 50%, 75%). All experiments use identical architectures, hyperparameters, and random seeds. 

A. Classification Performance 

Table I reports classification accuracy across masking lev-els. AttnGen(10%) achieves 96.73% accuracy, compared to 95.83% for the baseline CNN (+0.90 pp). AttnGen(20%) 

reaches 96.10%. Fig. 1: Masking patterns for human and worm sequences at different masking levels. Blue: retained positions; red: masked positions. 

At higher masking levels (50% and 75%), accuracy de-creases to 95.55% and 79.81%, respectively. This drop sug-gests that removing too many positions eliminates information required for classification.                     

> TABLE I: Classification accuracy on the demo_human_or_worm bench-mark.
> Model Accuracy (%) vs. Baseline Convergence
> Traditional Genomic CNN 95.83 ––AttnGen(10%) 96.73 +0.90 faster AttnGen(20%) 96.10 +0.27 faster AttnGen(50%) 95.55 −0.28 faster AttnGen(75%) 79.81 −4.02 unstable

B. Attention-Based Masking Visualization 

Figure 1 shows masking patterns at different levels. At 20% masking, removed positions are distributed across sequence, while retained positions form compact regions that differ across samples. This variation indicates that masking is driven by sequence specific importance estimates rather than fixed positional patterns. At higher masking levels (50%), retained regions become smaller and less connected, and classification becomes more sensitive to the remaining context. 

C. Gradient-Based Importance Analysis 

We compare attention based importance with gradient based rankings by measuring how accuracy changes when high gradient positions are removed. For each sequence, position are ranked by gradient magnitude and progressively masked. Accuracy decreases as more high-gradient positions are removed. Masking 10 positions reduces accuracy by approx-imately 14.5 pp, while masking all positions reduces perfor-mance to chance level. The standard deviation increases with the number of masked positions. This indicates variability across sequences: some retain partial predictive signal after                               

> TABLE II: Accuracy under progressive masking of high-gradient positions.
> Masked Positions Mean Accuracy Std Dev Drop
> 096.91 ±17.33 –195.17 ±21.45 1.74 588.40 ±32.03 8.51 10 82.43 ±38.06 14.48 25 77.67 ±41.65 19.24 50 72.17 ±44.83 24.74 100 60.10 ±48.98 36.81 150 50.83 ±50.00 46.08 200 50.00 ±50.01 46.91

masking, while others do not. This variation is consistent with differences in how informative regions are distributed across inputs.          

> Fig. 2: Accuracy under progressive masking of high-gradient positions. Shaded region: ±1 std.

D. Ablation Study 

We study the 10% masking configuration to isolate the effects of attention-based masking and KL-consistency reg-ularization . Table III reports classification accuracy for each variant. 

TABLE III: Ablation on AttnGen(10%). 

Configuration Accuracy (%) 

Full Method (Attention + KL) 96.73 

Random Masking + KL 95.88 Attention Masking (No KL) 95.98 Baseline (No Masking) 95.83 

Random masking with KL regularization (95.88%) per-forms similarly to the baseline (95.83%), indicating that KL consistency alone does not improve performance when masking is not guided by importance scores. In contrast, attention-based masking without KL (95.98%) yields a larger improvement, suggesting that identifying and removing low-importance positions contributes more directly to performance gains. Combining attention-based masking with KL regulariza-tion produces the highest accuracy (96.73%), indicating that attention determines which positions are removed, while KL regularization stabilizes the output distribution when they are. 

E. Training Stability 

Moderate masking ratios (10–20%) produce stable opti-mization, with validation loss decreasing smoothly and re-maining close to training loss throughout training. The 50% configuration remains stable but shows a wider generalization gap, consistent with the accuracy drop reported in Table I. In contrast, 75% masking leads to a rapid increase in vali-dation loss after early epochs, indicating that the model fails to maintain generalization when too much input information is removed. VI. C ONCLUSION 

We presented AttnGen , a training framework that inte-grates importance estimation into the optimization process for genomic sequence classification. By combining attention-based saliency with progressive masking and KL based con-sistency, the model focuses on a compact set of informa-tive positions while maintaining predictive performance. On the demo_human_or_worm benchmark, moderate masking (10–20%) provides the best trade off, reaching up to 96.73% accuracy. Ablatin results show that attention-guided masking is the primary source of improvement. Additionally, removing high-importance positions leads to a larger drop in accuracy compared to removing low-importance ones, indicating that the learned importance scores align with the model’s predic-tions. Future work includes extending the method to longer and more complex genomic sequences. REFERENCES [1] Stormo, G. DNA binding sites: representation and discovery. Bioinfor-matics 16, 16–23 (2000). [2] LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. Deep learning. Nature 521, 436–444 (2015). [3] Karkehabadi, A. & Sadeghmalakabadi, S. Evaluating deep learning models for architectural image classification: A case study on the UC Davis campus. 2024 IEEE 8th International Conference on Information and Communication Technology (CICT) , pp. 1–6 (2024). [4] Hassanpour, J., Srivastav, V., Mutter, D. & Padoy, N. Overcoming Di-mensional Collapse in Self-Supervised Contrastive Learning for Medical Image Segmentation. (2024). [5] Simonyan, K., Vedaldi, A. & Zisserman, A. Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualising image classification models and saliency maps. 

arXiv:1312.6034 (2013). [6] Sundararajan, M., Taly, A. & Yan, Q. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In ICML , 3319–3328 (2017). [7] Shrikumar, A., Greenside, P. & Kundaje, A. Learning important features through propagating activation differences. In ICML , 3145–3153 (2017). [8] Avsec, ˇZ. et al. Effective gene expression prediction from sequence by integrating long-range interactions. Nature Methods 18, 1196–1203 (2021). [9] Adebayo, J. et al. Sanity checks for saliency maps. In NeurIPS 31, 9505–9515 (2018). [10] Ross, A., Hughes, M. & Doshi-Velez, F. Right for the right reasons: Training differentiable models by constraining their explanations. In 

IJCAI , 2662–2670 (2017). [11] Ismail, A., Corrada Bravo, H. & Feizi, S. Improving deep learning interpretability by saliency guided training. In NeurIPS 34, 26726–26739 (2021). [12] Karkehabadi, A., Homayoun, H. & Sasan, A. SMOOT: Saliency guided mask optimized online training. In 2024 IEEE 17th Dallas Circuits and Systems Conference (DCAS) , pp. 1–6 (2024). [13] Greˇ sov´ a, K., Martinek, V., ˇCech´ ak, D., ˇSimeˇ cek, P. & Alexiou, P. Genomic benchmarks: a collection of datasets for genomic sequence classification. BMC Genomic Data 24, 25 (2023). [14] Karkehabadi, A., Homayoun, H. & Sasan, A. Unified Gravity Loss for Robust Neural Networks Through Feature Space Optimization. 

Proceedings of the Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI 2025 , pp. 947– 953 (2025). [15] Alipanahi, B., Delong, A., Weirauch, M. & Frey, B. Predicting the sequence specificities of DNA- and RNA-binding proteins by deep learning. Nature Biotechnology 33, 831–838 (2015). [16] Karkehabadi, A., Latibari, B., Homayoun, H. & Sasan, A. HLGM: A novel methodology for improving model accuracy using saliency-guided high and low gradient masking. In 2024 14th International Conference on Information Science and Technology (ICIST) , pp. 909–917 (2024). [17] Zhou, J. & Troyanskaya, O. Predicting effects of noncoding variants with deep learning-based sequence model. Nature Methods 12, 931–934 (2015). [18] Quang, D. & Xie, X. DanQ: a hybrid convolutional and recurrent deep neural network for quantifying the function of DNA sequences. Nucleic Acids Research 44, e107 (2016). [19] Selvaraju, R. et al. Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization. In ICCV , 618–626 (2017). [20] Kapishnikov, A., Bolukbasi, T., Vi´ egas, F. & Terry, M. Guided integrated gradients: An adaptive path method for removing noise. In CVPR , 5050– 5058 (2021).